//Robinson Crusoe
CHAPTER I - START IN LIFE
I WAS born in the year 1632, in the city of York, of a
good family, though not of that country, my father being a
foreigner of Bremen, who settled first at Hull. He got a
good estate by merchandise, and leaving off his trade, lived
afterwards at York, from whence he had married my
mother, whose relations were named Robinson, a very
good family in that country, and from whom I was called
Robinson Kreutznaer; but, by the usual corruption of
words in England, we are now called - nay we call
ourselves and write our name - Crusoe; and so my
companions always called me.
I had two elder brothers, one of whom was lieutenantcolonel
to an English regiment of foot in Flanders,
formerly commanded by the famous Colonel Lockhart,
and was killed at the battle near Dunkirk against the
Spaniards. What became of my second brother I never
knew, any more than my father or mother knew what
became of me.
Being the third son of the family and not bred to any
trade, my head began to be filled very early with rambling
thoughts. My father, who was very ancient, had given me
Robinson Crusoe
3 of 487
a competent share of learning, as far as house-education
and a country free school generally go, and designed me
for the law; but I would be satisfied with nothing but
going to sea; and my inclination to this led me so strongly
against the will, nay, the commands of my father, and
against all the entreaties and persuasions of my mother and
other friends, that there seemed to be something fatal in
that propensity of nature, tending directly to the life of
misery which was to befall me.
My father, a wise and grave man, gave me serious and
excellent counsel against what he foresaw was my design.
He called me one morning into his chamber, where he
was confined by the gout, and expostulated very warmly
with me upon this subject. He asked me what reasons,
more than a mere wandering inclination, I had for leaving
father’s house and my native country, where I might be
well introduced, and had a prospect of raising my fortune
by application and industry, with a life of ease and
pleasure. He told me it was men of desperate fortunes on
one hand, or of aspiring, superior fortunes on the other,
who went abroad upon adventures, to rise by enterprise,
and make themselves famous in undertakings of a nature
out of the common road; that these things were all either
too far above me or too far below me; that mine was the
Robinson Crusoe
4 of 487
middle state, or what might be called the upper station of
low life, which he had found, by long experience, was the
best state in the world, the most suited to human
happiness, not exposed to the miseries and hardships, the
labour and sufferings of the mechanic part of mankind,
and not embarrassed with the pride, luxury, ambition, and
envy of the upper part of mankind. He told me I might
judge of the happiness of this state by this one thing - viz.
that this was the state of life which all other people envied;
that kings have frequently lamented the miserable
consequence of being born to great things, and wished
they had been placed in the middle of the two extremes,
between the mean and the great; that the wise man gave
his testimony to this, as the standard of felicity, when he
prayed to have neither poverty nor riches.
He bade me observe it, and I should always find that
the calamities of life were shared among the upper and
lower part of mankind, but that the middle station had the
fewest disasters, and was not exposed to so many
vicissitudes as the higher or lower part of mankind; nay,
they were not subjected to so many distempers and
uneasinesses, either of body or mind, as those were who,
by vicious living, luxury, and extravagances on the one
hand, or by hard labour, want of necessaries, and mean or
Robinson Crusoe
5 of 487
insufficient diet on the other hand, bring distemper upon
themselves by the natural consequences of their way of
living; that the middle station of life was calculated for all
kind of virtue and all kind of enjoyments; that peace and
plenty were the handmaids of a middle fortune; that
temperance, moderation, quietness, health, society, all
agreeable diversions, and all desirable pleasures, were the
blessings attending the middle station of life; that this way
men went silently and smoothly through the world, and
comfortably out of it, not embarrassed with the labours of
the hands or of the head, not sold to a life of slavery for
daily bread, nor harassed with perplexed circumstances,
which rob the soul of peace and the body of rest, nor
enraged with the passion of envy, or the secret burning
lust of ambition for great things; but, in easy
circumstances, sliding gently through the world, and
sensibly tasting the sweets of living, without the bitter;
feeling that they are happy, and learning by every day’s
experience to know it more sensibly,
After this he pressed me earnestly, and in the most
affectionate manner, not to play the young man, nor to
precipitate myself into miseries which nature, and the
station of life I was born in, seemed to have provided
against; that I was under no necessity of seeking my bread;
Robinson Crusoe
6 of 487
that he would do well for me, and endeavour to enter me
fairly into the station of life which he had just been
recommending to me; and that if I was not very easy and
happy in the world, it must be my mere fate or fault that
must hinder it; and that he should have nothing to answer
for, having thus discharged his duty in warning me against
measures which he knew would be to my hurt; in a word,
that as he would do very kind things for me if I would stay
and settle at home as he directed, so he would not have so
much hand in my misfortunes as to give me any
encouragement to go away; and to close all, he told me I
had my elder brother for an example, to whom he had
used the same earnest persuasions to keep him from going
into the Low Country wars, but could not prevail, his
young desires prompting him to run into the army, where
he was killed; and though he said he would not cease to
pray for me, yet he would venture to say to me, that if I
did take this foolish step, God would not bless me, and I
should have leisure hereafter to reflect upon having
neglected his counsel when there might be none to assist
in my recovery.
I observed in this last part of his discourse, which was
truly prophetic, though I suppose my father did not know
it to be so himself - I say, I observed the tears run down
his face very plentifully, especially when he spoke of my
brother who was killed: and that when he spoke of my
having leisure to repent, and none to assist me, he was so
moved that he broke off the discourse, and told me his
heart was so full he could say no more to me.
I was sincerely affected with this discourse, and, indeed,
who could be otherwise? and I resolved not to think of
going abroad any more, but to settle at home according to
my father’s desire. But alas! a few days wore it all off; and,
in short, to prevent any of my father’s further
importunities, in a few weeks after I resolved to run quite
away from him. However, I did not act quite so hastily as
the first heat of my resolution prompted; but I took my
mother at a time when I thought her a little more pleasant
than ordinary, and told her that my thoughts were so
entirely bent upon seeing the world that I should never
settle to anything with resolution enough to go through
with it, and my father had better give me his consent than
force me to go without it; that I was now eighteen years
old, which was too late to go apprentice to a trade or clerk
to an attorney; that I was sure if I did I should never serve
out my time, but I should certainly run away from my
master before my time was out, and go to sea; and if she
would speak to my father to let me go one voyage abroad,
Robinson Crusoe
8 of 487
if I came home again, and did not like it, I would go no
more; and I would promise, by a double diligence, to
recover the time that I had lost.
This put my mother into a great passion; she told me
she knew it would be to no purpose to speak to my father
upon any such subject; that he knew too well what was
my interest to give his consent to anything so much for
my hurt; and that she wondered how I could think of any
such thing after the discourse I had had with my father,
and such kind and tender expressions as she knew my
father had used to me; and that, in short, if I would ruin
myself, there was no help for me; but I might depend I
should never have their consent to it; that for her part she
would not have so much hand in my destruction; and I
should never have it to say that my mother was willing
when my father was not.
Though my mother refused to move it to my father,
yet I heard afterwards that she reported all the discourse to
him, and that my father, after showing a great concern at
it, said to her, with a sigh, ‘That boy might be happy if he
would stay at home; but if he goes abroad, he will be the
most miserable wretch that ever was born: I can give no
consent to it.’
Robinson Crusoe
9 of 487
It was not till almost a year after this that I broke loose,
though, in the meantime, I continued obstinately deaf to
all proposals of settling to business, and frequently
expostulated with my father and mother about their being
so positively determined against what they knew my
inclinations prompted me to. But being one day at Hull,
where I went casually, and without any purpose of making
an elopement at that time; but, I say, being there, and one
of my companions being about to sail to London in his
father’s ship, and prompting me to go with them with the
common allurement of seafaring men, that it should cost
me nothing for my passage, I consulted neither father nor
mother any more, nor so much as sent them word of it;
but leaving them to hear of it as they might, without
asking God’s blessing or my father’s, without any
consideration of circumstances or consequences, and in an
ill hour, God knows, on the 1st of September 1651, I
went on board a ship bound for London. Never any
young adventurer’s misfortunes, I believe, began sooner,
or continued longer than mine. The ship was no sooner
out of the Humber than the wind began to blow and the
sea to rise in a most frightful manner; and, as I had never
been at sea before, I was most inexpressibly sick in body
and terrified in mind. I began now seriously to reflect
Robinson Crusoe
10 of 487
upon what I had done, and how justly I was overtaken by
the judgment of Heaven for my wicked leaving my
father’s house, and abandoning my duty. All the good
counsels of my parents, my father’s tears and my mother’s
entreaties, came now fresh into my mind; and my
conscience, which was not yet come to the pitch of
hardness to which it has since, reproached me with the
contempt of advice, and the breach of my duty to God
and my father.
All this while the storm increased, and the sea went
very high, though nothing like what I have seen many
times since; no, nor what I saw a few days after; but it was
enough to affect me then, who was but a young sailor, and
had never known anything of the matter. I expected every
wave would have swallowed us up, and that every time
the ship fell down, as I thought it did, in the trough or
hollow of the sea, we should never rise more; in this
agony of mind, I made many vows and resolutions that if
it would please God to spare my life in this one voyage, if
ever I got once my foot upon dry land again, I would go
directly home to my father, and never set it into a ship
again while I lived; that I would take his advice, and never
run myself into such miseries as these any more. Now I
saw plainly the goodness of his observations about the

//Random English cookbook
BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES
Note.—To the housewife pretty nearly at the end
of her resources, no less than to the hungry folk
for whom she caters, several of the following suggestions
will come with all the force of novelty. I have divided them, for purposes of the cook's
convenience, into methods of treating hot meat and
cold. We are only too apt to become stale and
monotonous in our repetition, month by month and
year by year, of certain too-familiar joints and
rechauffes. But anything which can obUterate the
memory of the horrid word " hash," should be as desirable as it is rare. Where stews are concerned
(whether of fresh or cooked meat), I would like to remind the reader that anything baked iq earthen- ware is infinitely better cooked and better flavoured
than it can ever be in a metal vessel. The earthen- ware retains and imparts heat and flavour in a most
marvellous manner. And indeed, speaking generally,
I would say, steer clear of metal whenever and
wherever you can, making use of wood and earthen- ware alone. Also, it is to be observed, that careful
basting (too frequently ignored) is an essential
point, not only in the cooking, but in the appearance
of any baked or roasted meat.
1
2 BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES
FRESH MEAT
1. BEEF COLLOP MINCED (Kent, 1809)
Chop two pounds of beef very fine, taking from
it every particle of fat and string ; put an onion
shred small into a stewpan with pepper and salt and a piece of butter. Let them boil about a minute
;
put in the meat and move it about with a spoon till it looks a little white ; then add a little good gravy and spice to your taste. Let it come
to a boil, when it will be quite done enough.
2. GALANTINE OF BEEF (Hertfordshire)
Mince a quarter of a pound of beef and half a pound of bacon. Put both in a basin with six ounces of breadcrumbs, and pepper and salt. Beat
two eggs and a gill of stock together and add to the other ingredients, and mix all well. Shape
this into a nice roU, tie in a buttered pudding cloth,
and boil for two hours ; turn out, let it set, and
glaze it.
3. ROLLED BEEF (Hertfordshire)
A pound and a half of steak or gravy beef,
four ounces of breadcrumbs, an ounce and a haK
of chopped suet, one egg, seasoning to taste of parsley, thyme, salt, and pepper. The meat should
be in one piece, and about half an inch thick. Put
the meat on a board and flatten it with a roUingpin.
Mix all the dry ingredients after having
chopped the parsley finely. Then add the beaten
egg, or, if you wish to be very economical, a little milk. Spread the forcemeat over the beef, roll up.
BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES 3
and tie into shape with tape or string. Put into a deep pie-dish. Pour over it three-quarters of a pint
of boiling water, cover and stew in a slow oven for one and a half or two hours. Take out the meat, and
put it on a dish. Mix smooth a tablespoonful of flour with cold water, add this to the gravy, place in a
saucepan, and stir over the fire till the gravy is thick. Colour it with a little browning, pour over
the meat, and serve.
4. BEEF KIDNEYS A LA RUSSE (Hertfordshire)
Soak some beef kidney in cold water for an hour,
change the water once or twice as it colours. Then
set it in a saucepan, cover it with cold water and
bring to the boil ; draia off the water and add more,
then simmer the kidney gently for fifteen minutes.
Pour off the liquor and cut out the sinew, etc., from
the kidney. Slice the meat thinly, dredge with
seasoned flour, and fry in hot butter until brown.
Take out the meat, stir in a tablespoonful of flour in the butter and brown thoroughly ; add a tablespoonful
of tomato juice, and a little lemon juice, pepper
and salt, and sufficient gravy to make enough
sauce to cover the kidney. Place the meat in the sauce and cook all slowly for one hour, adding some
gravy if necessary. Serve with fried croutons of bread, and tiny rolls of fried bacon.
5. BEEF OLIVES (Cheshire)
Take one and a half pounds of beef (steak for preference) and cut it into pieces four inches long,
about the same in width, and half an inch thick.
Mince up the trimmings and odds and ends of the
beef, along with two ounces of suet, and one tea-
4 BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES
spoonful each of parsley, thyme, and marjoram.
Add three ounces of breadcrumbs, a grated lemonrind,
a little grated nutmeg, one beaten egg, and
a pint of brown gravy, half a teaspoonful of salt,
and a little pepper. When these ingredients are thoroughly united, beat out each piece of beef as
flat as possible, and spread each piece with the
above mixture : roll it up and tie it tightly. Place
the rolls in a stew-pan with one pint seasoned brown
gravy, and stew gently for three-quarters of an
hour. Dish with a border of mashed potato or
rice, and pour gravy round the ohves.
6. FOR SPICED BEEF (Lancashire)
(This is a very good and old recipe)
To one gallon of boiling water add as much salt as will swim an egg, half an ounce saltpetre, half an ounce salt prunelle, half an ounce mustard seed,
ditto of cloves, cayenne pods, ciimamon, mace
;
one ounce of ginger, haK a pound of sugar (Demerara)
; all to be boiled together. The spices to be
boiled in the water, and then the salt and sugar to be
added when cold. The meat to be put in this pickle
for several weeks. Keep turning. Silver side of beef or any part of round.
7. STEWED RUMP OF BEEF (Eighteenth Centiuy)
Half roast your beef, then put it in a large sauce- pan or cauldron, with two quarts of water, and one
of red wine, two or three blades of mace, a shalot, a spoonful of lemon pickle, two of walnut ketchup,
the same of browning, cayenne pepper and salt to your taste ; let it stew over a gentle fire, close covered
for two hours ; then take up your beef, and lay it on
BEEP AKD MUTTON RECIPES 5
a deep dish, skim off the fat, and strain the gravy,
and put in haM a pint of mushrooms ; t'Jcken your
gravy, and pour it over your beef, lay round it forcemeat balls : garnish with horse radish, and
serve it up.
8. BROILED BEEF STEAKS (Eighteenth Century)
Cut your steaks off a rump of beef about half an
inch thick, let your fire be clear, rub your gridiron
well with beef suet, when it is hot lay them on ; let them broil until they begin to brown, turn them,
and, when the other side is brown, lay them on a hot dish, with a slice of butter betwixt every steak ; sprinkle a little pepper and salt over them, let them
stand two or three minutes, then slice a shalot as thin as possible into a tablespoonful of water ; lay on your steaks again, keep turning them till they are done enough, put them on your dish, pour the shalot
and water amongst them, and send them to the
table.
9. TO DRESS BEEF STEAKS THE COMMON WAY
(Eighteenth Century)
Pry your steaks in butter a good brown, then
put in half a pint of water, an onion sliced, a spoonful
of walnut ketchup, a little caper liquor, pepper
and salt, cover them close with a dish and let them
stew gently ; when they are done enough, thicken
the gravy with flour and butter, and serve them up.
10. MADRAS STEAK (Hertfordshire)
Procure a good beef steak, dip it in flour, and
place it in a baking tin, letting it lie flat, placing on
6 BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES
the top slices of onions ; put greased paper over. Put in an oven and cook for twenty minutes ; mix
together a teaspoonful of curry powder, a table- spoonful of vinegar in a cup of hot water, and add
it to beef ; replace the lid and let stew gently for an
hour and a haK ; serve very hot with onion on top
and gravy poured round.
11. STEWED STEAK (Sussex)
Fry first with one shalot, then put it into a pan,
with a little good gravy, a teaspoonful of made
mustard, a very Httle cayenne pepper, and a little
salt. Cover closely and let it cook gently for two
and a half hours. Then add a httle browning, a
little mushroom ketchup—or any other sauce—ladle the gravy over it and turn it once.
12. BRAZILIAN STEW (Sussex)
Take one pound of shin of beef, cut it into dice,
dip the pieces into about two tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Stick one clove in an onion, take one
carrot, one strip of celery, and add half a pint of water. Put the whole in a jar and cook slowly in a cool oven, or stand the jar in a saucepan of water.
13. FRENCH STEW (Surrey)
Cut into pieces two or three pounds of the lean
of fresh, tender beef, veal, or pork ; peel and shce a quarter of a peck of ripe tomatoes : season the
whole with a httle pepper and salt. Put all into a
stewpot, and cover it close, opening it only occasionally
to see how it is cooking. Put no water to the stew, the tomato-juice is enough liquid. When
BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES 7
the tomatoes are all dissolved, stir in a piece of
fresh butter dredged with flour, and the stew re- mains about a quarter of an hour longer. When the
meat is done through, have ready some bits of very- dry toast, cut in three-corner shape, having the
crust off. Dip the toast for a moment in some
hot water, butter it, and stand it up round the
inside of a deep dish. Fill in the stew and serve hot.
14. LANCASTER STEW (Hertfordshire)
Fry two large onions light brown ; mix a table- spoon of flour and fry it ; add a quart of thin stock
or water, and a tablespoonful of vinegar. Cut two
pounds of gravy beef or skirting into pieces, add
them, let simmer for three hours ; an hour before
serving drop in some savoury balls, made with half a pound of flour, teaspoonful of baking powder, the same of salt, half of pepper, parsley, thyme, half an
onion chopped, three tablespoonfuls of suet, mixed
with water. Dish the meat in centre with balls around.
15. BOILED TONGUE (Eighteenth Century)
If your tongue be a dry one, steep it in water aU
night, then boil it three hours ; if you would have it to eat hot, stick it with cloves, rub it over with the
yolk of an egg, strew over it bread crumbs, baste
it with butter, set it before the fire till it is a light
brown ; when you dish it up, pour a little brown
gravy, or red wine sauce, mixed the same way as
for venison ; lay shces of currant jeUy round it. N.B.—If it be a pickled one, only wash the water
out of it.
8 BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES
VARIOUS
16. CORNISH PASTY (West-country)
Into half a pound of flour rub three ounces of lard
or dripping, and a salt-spoonful of salt. Slice up
finely about half a pound of uncooked potatoes, about
half a pound of tender beefsteak cut into small
pieces about two inches in length : add about two
ounces of chopped onions. Make a paste with the
flour and dripping, roll to about three-quarters of an inch thick, and cut it the size and shape of a
dinner-plate. Lay the potatoes and meat on one
half, and fold over the other half as for a jam
"turn-over," moistening the edges with a httle water, and pinch them in all round. Bake in a moderate oven from half to three-quarters of an
hour.
17. MOCK GAME (Warwickshire)
Required : beef steak, rashers of bacon, red currant
jelly, lemon, vinegar, salt. Cut steak into strips,
roll up each strip with a slice of bacon inside, tie each roll. Fry these lightly, put rolls into a sauce- pan containing one tablespoonful of vinegar, one
teaspoonful of grated lemon rind, two tablespoonfuls
of red currant jelly, three or four pepper-corns,
and cloves and salt to taste. Stew until tender,
place the rolls on a hot dish, thicken the liquid,
add some good stock, pour this over the steak and
serve, garnished with toast sippets and red currant
jelly and parsley.
18. STEWED OX TAILS (Devonshire)
Cut two ox-tails into joints and fry them in butter. Place them in a quart of cold water, with
BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES 9
a little onion, cloves, mace, lemon-peel, one table- spoonful of lemon-juice, and three sprigs of parsley
;
let all simmer gently for three hours, then take the
tails out and thicken the gravy with two or three
tablespoonfuls of flour. Strain it through a sieve, season with pepper and salt ; place the tails in the
gravy, and gently simmer for one hour more. Dish
and serve with chopped parsley and toast.
19. TRIPE (Stirrey)
Take two pounds of fresh tripe, well cleaned and
dressed. Cut the coarse fat away, and boil it for about half an hour in equal parts of mUk and water. The water should have been on the fire for half an
hour previously, with four large, sliced (English)
onions in. When the tripe is cooked, make the
liquid into a rich onion sauce, and serve it very
hot over the tripe.
20. CURRIED TRIPE (Hertfordshire)
Take two or three large onions, and fry them in dripping tUl tender. Chop them very fine, or, if preferred, pass through a sieve, and put them with a dessertspoonful of curry powder and peaflour
mixed. When quite smooth, add gradually one
pint of stock, and stir till it boUs. Now take one and a half pounds of boiled tripe, cut
it into pieces about one inch square, and put it into the sauce. Let all stew together for one and
a half hours. Have ready some well boUed rice,
make a ball of it on the dish, pour the tripe into
the centre and serve. Squeeze a little lemon juice over the whole. This dish is both economical and
nutritious.
10 BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES
21. FRICASSEE OF TRIPE (Yorkshire, 1769)
I Take the whitest seam tripes you can get, and cut
them in long pieces, put them into a steAvpan with a little good gravy, a few breadcrumbs, a lump of butter, a little vinegar to your taste, and a little mustard if you like it. Shake it up all together with
a little shredded parsley ; let it stew slowly till done.
Garnish your dish with sippets.
22. ANOTHER WAY
II Take the whitest and thickest seam tripe, cut the
white part in thin slices, put it into a stewpan with a
little white gravy, lemon-juice, shredded lemon-peel,
and a tablespoonful of white wine. Take the yolks
of two or three eggs and beat them very well ; put
to them a little thick cream, shredded parsley, and
two or three (minced) chives if you have any. Shake
it all together over the fire till it be as thick as cream,
but don't let it boil for fear it curdle. Garnish with
sippets, sHced lemon, or mushrooms. This will eat
like chicken.
MUTTON
23. BASQUE OF MUTTON (Eighteenth Century)
Take the caul of a leg of veal, lay it in a copper
dish the size of a small punch bowl, take the lean of a leg of mutton that has been kept a week, chop
it exceedingly small, take half its weight in beef
marrow, the crumbs of a penny loaf, the yolks of four eggs, half a pint of red wine, the rind of
BEEF AND MUTTON RECIPES 11
haK a lemon grated ; mix it like sausage meat,
and lay it in your caul in the inside of your dish, close up the caul, and bake it ia a quick oven; when it comes out, lay your dish upside down, and
turn the whole out ; pour over it brown gravy and
send it up with venison sauce in a boat. Garnish
with pickles.
24. ROLLED BREAST OF MUTTON (Hertfordshire)
Take a breast of mutton, lay it on a board, and remove the bones. Trim it neatly, and remove some
of the fat. Cover the side from which the bones
have been removed with slices of ham, and then
with a layer of meat stuffing, which has a flavouring
of lemon grated. Quarter some pickled walnuts,
and place them here and there on the forcemeat.
Now roll the meat neatly and tightly, screwing
the flap over. Bind it round with tape and roast
it. The meat should be wrapped in caul or greased
paper for the first hour it is in the roaster, and after- wards basted in the ordinary way. Place the
mutton on a hot dish, remove the tape, and make
a little good gravy. Strain it well, and stir it into a tablespoonful of red currant jelly, and pour it over and round the meat. Then take two table- spoonfuls of hghtly browned breadcrumbs, a tea- spoonful of mixed herbs, a quarter of a teaspoonful
of pepper, half a teaspoonful of salt, and mix
thoroughly. Sprinkle this over the meat and serve.
25. THE BEST WAY TO COOK A CHOP (Essex)
Place the chop in a colander and pour over it some boiling water. This seals up the tissues and
does not allow any nutritious juices to be wasted.

//English law
This chapter considers the following matters:
1.1 Features of the English legal system
1.1.1 Antiquity and continuity
1.1.2 Absence of a legal code
1.1.3 The law-making role of the judges
1.1.4 Importance of procedure
1.1.5 Absence of Roman law
1.1.6 The adversarial system of trial
1.2 Classification of English law
1.2.1 Public law and private law
1.2.2 Common law and equity
1.2.3 Civil law and criminal law
1.2.4 The distinction between law and fact
1.3 Sources of English law
1.3.1 Statutes
1.3.2 Judicial precedent
1.4 European Union law
1.4.1 The institutions of the European Union
1.4.2 Sources of community law
1.4.3 The European Court of Justice
1.4.4 Supremacy of EU law
1.5 The European Convention on Human Rights
1.5.1 The Human Rights Act 1998
1.5.2 The European Convention on Human Rights
1.5.3 The European Court of Human Rights
1.5.4 The impact of the Human Rights Act
 1
1.1 FEATURES OF THE ENGLISH LEGAL
SYSTEM
 The English legal system is unlike that of any other
European country. An outline knowledge of the
features which make the English system so distinct is
essential to an understanding of English law and the
English legal process.
1.1.1 Antiquity and continuity
 English law has evolved, without any major upheaval or
interruption, over many hundreds of years. The last successful
invasion of England occurred in 1066, when King
William and his Normans conquered the country. King
William did not impose Norman law on the conquered
Anglo-Saxons, but allowed them to keep their own laws.
These laws were not uniform throughout the kingdom.
Anglo-Saxon law was based on custom and in different
parts of the country different customs prevailed.
 In the second half of the twelfth century King Henry
II introduced a central administration for the law and
began the process of applying one set of legal rules, ‘the
common law’, throughout England. Since that time,
English law has evolved piecemeal. For this reason the
English legal system retains a number of peculiarities and
anomalies which find their origins in mediaeval England.
 The world history of the past few hundred years
has been a litany of revolution and conquest. The new
rulers of a country tend to start afresh with the law.
In the Soviet Union the communists introduced Soviet
law, in France Napoleon introduced the Napoleonic
code, in the United States the founding fathers wrote
the American Constitution. But England is one of
the very few countries to have survived the last nine
hundred years with no lasting revolution from within
or foreign conquest from abroad. Some English laws
and legal practices have evolved continuously since
the time of King Ethelbert, who became king of Kent
in the year 580. The Norman Conquest was a major
Thi h t id th f ll
 Introduction
M01_MACI2747_06_SE_C01.indd 1 01_MACI2747_06_SE_C01.indd 1 2/16/12 9:58 AM /16/12 9:58 AM
Proofs: File not for distribution without prior permission from Pearson Education
2 Chapter 1 The legal system
upheaval, but even that was not a fresh beginning
for the law.
 English law does not become inoperative merely
because of the passage of time. When we study the
law of contract we shall see that two ancient cases,
Pinnel’s Case (1602) 5 Co Rep 117a and Lampleigh v
Brathwaite (1615) Hob 105, are still important precedents.
Although these cases have been refined and
developed by subsequent cases, there would be no
reason why a modern lawyer should not cite them
in court. In the same way, statutes remain in force
indefinitely or until they are repealed. A statute
loses none of its authority merely because it has
lain dormant for many years. In R v Duncan [1944]
KB 713, for example, a defendant was convicted of
fortune-telling under the Witchcraft Act 1735, even
though the statute had long since fallen into disuse.
 Occasionally a litigant springs a major surprise
by invoking an ancient law. In 1818 the defendant
in Ashford v Thornton (1818) 1 B & A 405, claimed
the right to have an appeal against his conviction for
murder settled by battle. Trial by battle had been a
method of resolving disputes shortly after the Norman
Conquest but had fallen into disuse before the end
of the thirteenth century. In Ashford v Thornton ,
the offer of trial by battle was declined and so the
defendant was discharged. The Appeals of Murder Act
1819 was hurriedly passed. Until Parliament passed
this Act trial by battle still existed as a possible means
of settling some types of legal disputes.
1.1.2 Absence of a legal code
 In most European countries the law has been codified.
This means that the whole of the law on a particular
subject, for example the law of property, can be found
in one document or code. Some such codes merely
provide a framework for the law, others attempt to
provide a complete statement of the law. As we shall
see, the bulk of English law has been made by judges
in individual cases. Rules of law made by senior judges
must be followed in later cases. In the majority of
cases brought before an English court a lawyer who is
trying to establish a legal principle will cite
earlier cases to prove that the principle exists and
that it should be applied in the current case. Often a
statute, an Act of Parliament, will provide the main
legal rules applicable to a particular case. A statute
ranks higher as a source of law than the previous
decision of any court. But even where a statute does
apply to a particular case, the court is likely to be
guided as to the meaning of the statute by earlier cases
which have considered its meaning.
 In general, the important cases on a particular area
of law are not reported in one special volume of law
reports devoted to a particular area of law, such as
the law of contract. (There are exceptions, specialist
law reports can be found on some areas of law such
as employment law or road traffic law. The system of
law reporting is examined in the following chapter at
2.9.) Generally, cases are reported as they are decided
and are therefore to be found in the law report volume
devoted to the year in which the case was decided.
As lawyers and students are only too well aware, it
can be very difficult to find all the cases relevant to a
particular legal issue.
 Occasionally, Parliament codifies an area of law
with a statute such as the Partnership Act 1890.
Such an Act aims to take all the relevant case law
on a particular subject and to codify it into one
comprehensible statute. The Law Commission, an
important law reform institution set up in 1965, has
the codification of appropriate areas of law as one
of its objects. But as we shall see, the vast majority
of English law remains uncodified. Nor does Britain
have a written constitution, as most other democratic
countries have.
1.1.3 The law-making role of the judges
 In most European countries the judges interpret the
legal code. In doing this they do not themselves
deliberately set out to create law. Later in this chapter,
when we study the doctrine of judicial precedent, we
shall see that the English courts are arranged in an
hierarchical structure and that courts lower down the
hierarchy must follow the previous decisions of courts
which are higher up. Senior English judges therefore
have a dual role. First, they interpret the existing
law, which is to be found in legislation and previous
decisions of higher ranking courts. Second, they create
the law by making legal principles which courts lower
down the hierarchy are bound to follow.
1.1.4 Importance of procedure
 In the Middle Ages a legal right could only be enforced
by means of a writ (an order signed by the King,
requiring a defendant to appear in court to answer the
claim being made). There were few types of writ and,
M01_MACI2747_06_SE_C01.indd 2 01_MACI2747_06_SE_C01.indd 2 2/16/12 9:59 AM /16/12 9:59 AM
Proofs: File not for distribution without prior permission from Pearson Education
1.1 Features of the English legal system 3
if a claim could not be brought within the confines
of one of the writs then no remedy was available.
To some extent lawyers were people who knew the
procedure of obtaining a remedy, rather than people
who knew the substantive principles of the law. A
person with a perfectly just claim would need a lawyer
to fit the claim within the procedures of one of the
writs. If the correct procedure was not rigidly adhered
to, then the claim would fail, even if the substance of
the claim was perfectly valid. To some extent this is
still true today. If a litigant fails to follow the correct
procedure it is possible that his claim will be struck
out. Recent reforms of the judicial process, which we
consider in Chapter 2 , have attempted to reduce the
importance of procedure. However, in cases which
involve a substantial claim there is no doubt that
procedure remains very important.
1.1.5 Absence of Roman law
 The Romans occupied England from 55 BC to AD 430.
Roman law was extremely sophisticated by the standards
of its day. The other European countries which
were part of the Roman Empire have retained elements
of Roman law. But English law has almost
no direct Roman law influence, although Roman
law is still taught as an academic subject at some
English universities and some areas of law have been
indirectly based on Roman law concepts. Scotland
was not conquered by the Romans, but Scots law has
more of a Roman law influence than English law.
This influence has been brought about by the
traditional alliance of France and Scotland. During
the Renaissance, when the modern European world
began to develop, Scotland and Continental Europe
saw a revival of interest in Roman law. This interest
was largely absent in England.
1.1.6 The adversarial system of trial
 The English system of trial is adversarial. This means
that the lawyers on either side are adversaries, who
‘fight’ each other in trying to win judgment for their
client. The judge supervises the battle between the
lawyers, but does not take part. Today the battle is
metaphoric, one party’s lawyers try to establish that
there is a case, the other party’s lawyers deny this by
whatever means permissible. In the early Middle Ages
the battle could be real enough, as certain types of
dispute were resolved with a Trial by Battle. In such
a trial the parties would fight each other, both armed
with a leather shield and a staff and it was thought
that God would grant victory to the righteous litigant.
If either of the parties was disabled, too young or too
old, he could hire a champion to fight for him. This
was no doubt considerably more entertaining than
a modern trial, but eventually it came to be realised
that it was not the best way to achieve justice. Lawyers
therefore replaced the champions. But the idea of a
battle survived and a trial is still a battle between the
lawyers, even if the shields and staffs have given way
to witnesses and precedents.
 Most other countries have an inquisitorial system
of criminal procedure where the judge is the inquisitor,
determined to discover the truth. A French investigating
judge (juge d’instruction), for example, has
enormous powers. He takes over the investigation
of a criminal case from the police. He can interrogate
whoever he wishes. He can compel witnesses to
give evidence and can surprise witnesses with other
witnesses, hoping that the confrontation will point
the finger of guilt. In a civil case, too, a French judge
will take a much more interventionist approach than
an English judge and it is the judge, rather than the
lawyers, who manages, the case.
 When a French case reaches court it is often all but
decided. By contrast, no one can ever be certain of the
outcome of an English trial. The lawyers will fight for
their clients on the day and either side might win. The
judge should be disinterested in the outcome, merely
ensuring that the lawyers fight by the rules. However,
since the introduction of the Civil Procedure Rules in
1999 civil trials have become less adversarial and the
judge manages the case to some extent.
 An important aspect of the adversarial system of
trial is that it is the task of the lawyers to bring the
relevant legal rules to the attention of the court. If a
lawyer in court makes a perfectly true statement of
law, such as the statement that all goods sold in the
course of business must be of satisfactory quality,
he must provide authority for this statement. This
means that the lawyer must quote the case, or in this
instance the statute, which made the law. Similarly,
students must cite authorities. At all levels of study, a
statement of law with no authority to back it up is not
regarded highly.
 Two other features of the English legal system,
both of which are examined in Chapter 2 , are worth
mentioning here. First, the legal profession is divided,
lawyers being either barristers or solicitors. Second, in
M01_MACI2747_06_SE_C01.indd 3 01_MACI2747_06_SE_C01.indd 3 2/16/12 9:59 AM /16/12 9:59 AM
Proofs: File not for distribution without prior permission from Pearson Education
4 Chapter 1 The legal system
almost all criminal trials the innocence or guilt of the
accused is decided by laymen, rather than by lawyers or
judges. If the accused is tried in the Crown Court it will
be a jury who decides whether the accused is guilty. If
the crime is tried in the magistrates’ court it is generally
a bench of lay magistrates who make this decision.
 Commonwealth and former Commonwealth
countries, such as Australia, Canada and New Zealand,
have retained the adversarial system of trial and most
other features of the English legal system. In the
United States of America trials are adversarial and
some features of the English legal system have been
retained. As we shall see both in this chapter and
in Chapter 2 , there is now considerable pressure to
change many of the traditional features of the English
legal system, which are increasingly perceived to be
ill-suited to the needs of the twenty-first century.
1.2 CLASSIFICATION OF ENGLISH LAW
 English law can be classified in three main ways:
as public law or private law; as common law or
equity; or as civil law or criminal law. Each of these
classifications is worth considering in some detail. It
is also worth considering the distinction between law
and fact .
1.2.1 Public law and private law
 Public law is concerned with decisions made by
bodies which are governmental in nature. Private law
is concerned with the legal relationships of individual
citizens. Criminal law, for example, is regarded as public
law. Citizens are prosecuted by the State. The law
of contract, on the other hand, is private law. A person
who sues for breach of contract acts as one individual
suing another individual. The State provides a framework
for such a dispute to be resolved. That is to say, it
provides the courts and the judges, but it plays no part
in bringing or defending the action.
 There are three main areas of public law.
Constitutional law is concerned with the workings of
the British Constitution, deciding such matters as the
powers of Government Ministers. Criminal law makes
certain types of behaviour criminal offences, giving
the State the power to prosecute and punish those
who commit such offences. Administrative law deals
with disputes between citizens and Government agencies,
such as the Department for Work and Pensions.
 Private law is also called civil law and can be
broadly broken down into five main areas: contract,
tort, property, trusts and family law.
1.2.2 Common law and equity
 The term common law is used in three distinct senses.
First, it is used to distinguish countries which have
adopted the features of the English legal system from
those countries which have not. The features of the
English legal system were explained at the beginning
of this chapter. Countries which adopt these features
are said to have a common law system. Countries
which adopt the central European system are said to
have a civil law system. Second, the term common
law denotes that body of law which was made by the
judges in the King’s (or Queen’s) courts, rather than
the body of law made by the judges in the courts of
equity. Third, common law means judge-made law as
distinct from statute law.
 It is, perhaps, unfortunate that the term common
law is used in three different ways. However, the
context in which the term is used will generally make
apparent the sense in which the term is used. Here
we are considering the difference between the law
made by the judges in the King’s courts and the law
made by the judges in the courts of equity. To understand
this distinction and to understand the meaning
of equity, we must know something of the historical
development of the law.
 A hundred years after the Norman Conquest, Henry
II began the process of applying one set of legal rules,
the common law, throughout the country. The King’s
representatives travelled from London to the provinces,
checking on the procedures in the local courts.
Gradually these representatives became judges rather
than administrators. When they arrived they would
try the cases which had been waiting for them (a
system which survived into the 1970s). The decisions
of these first travelling judges began to be recorded.
Subsequent judges followed the earlier decisions, in
order to provide a uniform system of law. Gradually
one set of legal rules became common to the whole
country and it therefore became known as the common
law.
 The common law grew to have several defects.
First, legal actions could only be commenced through
the issuing of a writ. By the middle of the thirteenth
century there were around 50 writs, to cover different
types of cases. In the reign of Henry III, after political

//English history
PREFACE.
ONCE more I come before the public with a work on the
history of a nation which is not mine by birth.
It is the ambition of all nations which enjoy a literary
culture to possess a harmonious and vivid narrative of their
own past history. And it is of inestimable value to any
people to obtain such a narrative, which shall comprehend
all epochs, be truc to fact and, while resting on thorough
research, yet be attractive to the reader ; for only by this aid
can the nation attain to a pcrfect self-consciousness, and
feeling the pulsation of its life throughout the story, become
fully acquainted with its own origin and growth and character.
But we may doubt whether up to this time worlts of such
an import and compass have ever been produced, and even
whether they can be produced. For who could apply critical
research, such as the progress of study now renders necessary,
to the mass of materials already collected, without being lost
in its immensity? Who again could possess the vivid susceptibility
requisite for doing justice to the several epochs, for
appreciating the actions, the modes of thought, and the moral
standard of each of them, and for understanding their relations
to universal history? We must be content in this department,
as well as in others, if we can but approximate to the ideal we
RANKE, VOL. I. b
vi PR EFA CZ. PREFA CE. vi i
set up. The best-written histories will be accounted the
best.
- When then an author undertakes to make the past life of a
foreign nation the object of a comprehensive literary work, he
will not think of writing its history as a nation in detail : for a
foreigner this would be impossible : but, in accordance with
the point of view he would naturally take, he will direct his
eyes to those epochs which have had the most effectual
influence on the development of mankind : only so far as is
necessary for the comprehension of these, will he introduce
anything that precedes or comes after them.
There is an especial charm in following, century after century,
the history of the English nation, in considering the
antagonism of the elements out of which it is composed, and
its share in the fortunes and enterprises of that great community
of western nations to which it belongs ; but it will
be readily granted that no other period can be compared
in general importance with the epoch of those religious
and political wars which fill the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries.
In the sixteenth century the part which England took in
the work of emancipating the world from the rule of the
western hierarchy decisively influenced not only its own constitution,
but also the success of the religious revolution
throughout Europe. In England the monarchy perfectly
understood its position in relation to this great change ;
while favouring the movement in its own interest, it nevertheless
contrived to maintain the old historical state of things
to a great extent ; nowhere have more of the institutions of
the Middle Ages been retained than in England ; nowhere
did the spiritual power link itself more closely with the
temporal. Here less depends on the conflict of doctrines,
for which Germany is the classic ground : the main interest
lies in the political transformation, accomplished amidst nlanifold
variations of opinions, tendencies, and events, and attended
at last by a war for the very existence of the nation.
For it was against England that the sacerdotal reaction
directed its main attack. To withstand it, the country was
forced to ally itself with the kindred elements on the Continent
: thc successful resistance of England was in turn of the
greatest service to them. The maintenance of Protestantism
in Western Europe, on the Continent as well as in Britain,
was effected by the united powers of both. To bring out
clearly this alternate action, it would not be advisable to lay
weight on every temporary foreign relation, on every step
of the home administration, and to search out men's personal
motives in them ; a shorter sketch may be best suited to
show the chief characters, as well as the main purport of
the events in their full light.
But then, through the connexion of England with Scotland,
and the accession of a new dynasty, a state of things ensued
under which the continued maintenance of the position taken
up in home and foreign politics was rendered doubtful. The
question arose whether the policy of England would not differ
from that of Great Britain and be compelled to give way to it.
The attempt to decide this question, and the reciprocal influence
of the newly allied countries, brought on conflicts at
homc which, though they in the main arose out of foreign
relations, yet for a long while threw those relations into the
background.
If we were required to express in the most general terms
the distinction between English and French policy in the
last two centuries, we might say that it consisted in this, that
the glory of their arms abroad lay nearest to the heart of
the French nation, and the legal settlement of their home
affairs to that of the English. How often have the French, in
b 2
viii PREFA CE t
PREFA CZ. ix
appearance at least, allowed themselves to be consoled for the
defects of the home administration by a great victory or an
advantageous peace ! And the English, from regard to constitutional
questions of apparently 'inferior importance, have
not seldom turned their eyes away from grievous perils which
hung over Europe.
The two great constitutional powers in England, the Crown
and the Parliament, dating back as they did to early times,
had often previously contended with each other, but had
harmoniously combined in the religious struggle, and had
both gained strength thereby ; but towards the middle of
the seventeenth century we see them first come into collision
over ecclesiastical regulations, and then engage in a war
for life and death respecting the constitution of the realm.
Elements originally separate unite in attacking the monarchy ;
meanwhile the old system breaks up, and energetic efforts are
made to found a new one on its ruins. But none of them
succeed; the deeply-felt need of a life regulated by law
and able to trust its own future is not satisfied; after long
storms men seek safety in a return to the old and approved
historic forms so characteristic of the German, and
especially of the English, race. But in this there is clearly
no solution of the original controversies, no reconciliation
of the conflicting elements : within narrower limits new discords
break out, which once more threaten a complete overthrow
: until, thanks to the indifference shown by England
to continental events, the most formidable dangers arise to
threaten the equilibrium of Europe, and even menace England
itself. These European emergencies coinciding with
the troubles at home bring about a new change of the old
forms in the Revolution of 1688, the main result of which is,
that the centre of gravity of public authority in England
shifts decisively to the parliamentary side. It was during
this same time that France had won military and political
superiority over all its neighbours on the mainland, and in
connexion with it had concentrated an almost absolute power
at home in the hands of the monarchy. England thus reorganised
now s,et itself to contest the political superiority of
France in a long and bloody war, which consequently became
a struggle between two rival forms of polity; and while the
first of these bore sway over the rest of Europe, the other
attained to con~plete realisation in its island-home, and called
forth at a later time manifold imitatiolls on the Continent
also, when the Continent was torn by civil strife. Between
these differing tendencies, these opposite poles, the life of
Europe has ever since vibrated from side to side.
When we contemplate the framework of the earth, those

//Decameron
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE AUTHOR TO THE
FOLLOWING DISCOURSES
Gracious Ladies, so often as I consider with my selfe, and observe
respectively, how naturally you are enclined to compassion; as
many times doe I acknowledge, that this present worke of mine,
will (in your judgement) appeare to have but a harsh and offensive
beginning, in regard of the mournfull remembrance it beareth at
the verie entrance of the last Pestilentiall mortality, universally
hurtfull to all that beheld it, or otherwise came to knowledge of it.
But for all that, I desire it may not be so dreadfull to you, to hinder
your further proceeding in reading, as if none were to looke
thereon, but with sighes and teares. For, I could rather wish, that so
fearefull a beginning, should seeme but as an high and steepy hil
appeares to them, that attempt to travell farre on foote, and
ascending the same with some difficulty, come afterward to walk
upon a goodly even plaine, which causeth the more contentment in
them, because the attayning thereto was hard and painfull. For
even as pleasures are cut off by griefe and anguish; so sorrowes
cease by joyes most sweete and happie arriving.
After this briefe mollestation; briefe I say, because it is contained
within small compasse of Writing; immediately followeth the most
sweete and pleasant taste of pleasure, whereof (before) I made
promise to you. Which (peradventure) could not bee expected by
such a beginning, if promise stood not thereunto engaged.
And indeed, if I could well have conveyed you to the center of my
desire, by any
other way, then so rude and rocky a passage as this is, I would
gladly have done it. But because without this Narration, we could
not demonstrate the occasion how and wherefore the matters
hapned, which you shall reade in the ensuing Discourses: I must
set them downe (even as constrained thereto by meere necessity) in
writing after this manner.
The yeare of our blessed Saviours incarnation, 1348, that
memorable mortality happened in the excellent City, farre beyond
all the rest in Italy; which plague, by operation of the superiour
bodies, or rather for our enormous iniquities, by the just anger of
God was sent upon us mortals. Some few yeeres before, it tooke
beginning in the Easterne partes, sweeping thence an innumerable
13
quantity of living soules: extending it selfe afterward from place to
place Westward, until it seized on the said City. Where neither
humane skill or providence, could use any prevention,
notwithstanding it was cleansed of many annoyances, by diligent
Officers thereto deputed: besides prohibition of all sickly persons
enterance, and all possible provision dayly used for conservation of
such as were in health, with incessant prayers and supplications of
devoute people, for the asswaging of so dangerous a sicknesse.
About the beginning of the yeare, it also began in very strange
manner, as appeared by divers admirable effects; yet not as it had
done in the East Countries, where Lord or Lady being touched
therewith, manifest signes of inevitable death followed thereon, by
bleeding at the nose. But here it began with yong children, male
and female, either under the armepits, or in the groine by certaine
swellings,
in some to the bignesse of an Apple, in others like an Egge, and so
in divers greater or lesser, which (in their vulgar Language) they
termed to be a Botch or Byle. In very short time after, those two
infected parts were growne mortiferous, and would disperse
abroad indifferently, to all parts of the body; whereupon, such was
the quality of the disease, to shew it selfe by blacke or blew spottes,
which would appeare on the armes of many, others on their
thighes, and every part else of the body: in some great and few, in
others small and thicke.
Now, as the Byle (at the beginning) was an assured signe of neere
approaching death; so prooved the spots likewise to such as had
them: for the curing of which sicknesse it seemed, that the
Physitians counsell, the vertue of Medicines, or any application
else, could not yeeld any remedy: but rather it plainely appeared,
that either the nature of the disease would not endure it, or
ignorance in the Physitians could not comprehend from whence
the cause proceeded, and so by consequent, no resolution was to be
determined. Moreover, beside the number of such as were skilfull
in Art, many more both women and men, without ever having any
knowledge in Physicke, became Physitians: so that not onely few
were healed, but (well-neere) all dyed, within three dayes after the
saide signes were seene; some sooner, and others later, commonly
without either Feaver, or any other accident.
And this pestilence was yet of farre greater power or violence; for,
not onely healthfull persons speaking to the sicke, comming to see
them, or ayring cloathes in kindnesse to comfort them, was an
occasion of ensuing death: but touching
14
their garments, or any foode whereon the sicke person fed, or any
thing else used in his service, seemed to transferre the disease from
the sicke to the sound, in very rare and miraculous manner.
Among which matter of marvell, let me tell you one thing, which if
the eyes of many (as well as mine owne) had not seene, hardly
could I be perswaded to write it, much lesse to beleeve it, albeit a
man of good credit should report it. I say, that the quality of this
contagious pestilence was not onely of such efficacy, in taking and
catching it one of another, either men or women: but it extended
further, even in the apparent view of many, that the cloathes, or
anything else, wherein one died of that disease, being toucht, or
lyen on by any beast, farre from the kind or quality of man, they
did not onely contaminate and infect the said beast, were it Dogge,
Cat, or any other; but also it died very soone after.
Mine owne eyes (as formerly I have said) among divers other, one
day had evident experience heereof: for some poore ragged
cloathes of linnen and wollen, torne from a wretched body dead of
that disease, and hurled in the open streete; two Swine going by,
and (according to their naturall inclination) seeking for foode on
every dunghill, tossed and tumbled the cloaths with their snouts,
rubbing their heads likewise upon them; and immediately, each
turning twice or thrice about, they both fell downe dead on the
saide cloathes, as being fully infected with the contagion of them:
which accident, and other the like, if not far greater, begat divers
feares and imaginations in them that beheld them, all tending to a
most inhumane and uncharitable end; namely, to flie thence from
the sicke,
and touching any thing of theirs, by which meanes they thought
their health should be safely warranted.
Some there were, who considered with themselves, that living
soberly, with abstinence from all superfluity; it would be a
sufficient resistance against all hurtfull accidents. So combining
themselves in a sociable manner, they lived as separatists from all
other company, being shut up in such houses, where no sicke body
should be neere them. And there, for their more security, they used
delicate viands and excellent wines, avoiding luxurie, and refusing
speech to one another, not looking forth at the windowes, to heare
no cries of dying people, or see any coarses carried to buriall; but
having musicall instruments, lived there in all possible pleasure.
Others, were of a contrary opinion, who avouched, that there was
no other physicke more certaine, for a disease so desperate, then to
drinke hard, be merry among themselves, singing continually,
walking every where, and satisfying their appetites with
15
whatsoever they desired, laughing, and mocking at every
mournefull accident, and so they vowed to spend day and night:
for now they would goe to one Taverne, then to another, living
without any rule or measure; which they might very easily doe,
because every one of them, (as if he were to live no longer in this
World) had even forsaken all things that hee had. By meanes
whereof, the most part of the houses were become common, and all
strangers, might do the like (if they pleased to adventure it) even as
boldly as the Lord or owner, without any let or contradiction.
Yet in all this their beastly behaviour, they were wise enough, to
shun (so much as they might) the weake and sickly: In misery and
affliction of our City, the venerable authority of the Lawes, as well
divine as humane, was even destroyed, as it were, through want of
the lawfull Ministers of them. For they being all dead, or lying
sicke with the rest, or else lived so solitary, in such great necessity
of servants and attendants, as they could not execute any office,
whereby it was lawfull for every one to do as he listed.
Betweene these two rehearsed extremities of life, there were other
of a more moderate temper, not being so daintily dieted as the first,
nor drinking so dissolutely as the second; but used all things
sufficient for their appetites, and without shutting up themselves,
walked abroad, some carrying sweete nosegayes of flowers in their
hands; others odoriferous herbes, and others divers kinds of
spiceries, holding them to their noses, and thinking them most
comfortable for the braine, because the ayre seemed to be much
infected by the noysome smell of dead carkases, and other hurtfull
savours. Some other there were also of more inhumane minde
(howbeit peradventure it might be the surest) saying, that there
was no better physicke against the pestilence, nor yet so good, as to
flie away from it, which argument mainely moving them, and
caring for no body but themselves, very many, both men and
women, forsooke the City, their owne houses, their Parents,
Kindred, Friends, and Goods, flying to other mens dwellings elsewhere.
As if the wrath of God, in punnishing the sinnes of men
with this plague, would fall heavily upon none, but such as were
enclosed within the City wals; or else perswading
themselves, that not any should there bee left alive, but
that the finall ending of all things was come.
Now albeit these persons in their diversity of opinions died not all,
so undoubtedly they did not all escape; but many among them
becomming sicke, and making a generall example of their flight
and folly, among them that could not stirre out of their beds, they
16
languished more perplexedly then the other did. Let us omit, that
one Citizen fled after another, and one neighbour had not any care
of another, Parents nor kinred never visiting them, but utterly they
were forsaken on all sides: this tribulation pierced into the hearts of
men, and with such a dreadfull terrour, that one Brother forsooke
another, the Unkle the Nephew, the Sister the Brother, and the
Wife her Husband: nay, a matter much greater, and almost
incredible; Fathers and Mothers fled away from their owne
Children, even as if they had no way appertained to them. In
regard whereof, it could be no otherwise, but that a countlesse
multitude of men and women fell sicke; finding no charity among
their friends, except a very few, and subject to the avarice of
servants, who attended them constrainedly, (for great and
unreasonable wages) yet few of those attendants to be found any
where too. And they were men or women but of base condition, as
also of groser understanding, who never before had served in any
such necessities, nor indeed were any way else to be imployed; but
to give the sicke person such things as hee called for, or to awaite
the houre of his death; in the performance of which service,
oftentimes for gaine, they lost their owne lives.
In this extreame calamity, the sicke being thus forsaken of
neighbors, kinred, and friends, standing also in such need of
servants; a custome came up among them, never heard of before,
that there was not any woman, how noble, young, or faire soever
shee was, but falling sicke, shee must of necessity have a man to
attend her, were hee young or otherwise, respect of shame or
modesty no way prevailing, but all parts of her body must be
discovered to him, which (in the like urgency) was not to be seene
by any but women: whereon ensued afterward, that upon the
parties healing and recovery, it was the occasion of further
dishonesty, which many being more modestly curious of, refused
such disgracefull attending, chusing rather to die, then by such
helpe to bee healed. In regard whereof, as well through the want of
convenient remedies, (which the sicke by no meanes could attaine
unto) as also the violence of the contagion, the multitude of them
that died night and day, was so great, that it was a dreadfull sight
to behold, and as much to heare spoken of. So that meere necessity
(among them that remained living) begat new behaviours, quite
contrary to all which had beene in former times, and frequently
used among the City Inhabitants.
The custome of precedent dayes (as now againe it is) was, that
women, kinred, neighbours, and friends, would meete together at
the deceased parties house, and there, with them that were of
17
neerest alliance, expresse their hearts sorrow for their friends losse.
If not thus, they would assemble before the doore, with many of
the best Cittizens and kindred, and (according to the quality of the
deceased) the Cleargy met there likewise, and the dead body was
carried (in comely manner)
on mens shoulders, with funerall pompe of Torch light, and
singing, to the Church appointed by the deceased. But these
seemely orders, after that the fury of the pestilence began to
encrease, they in like manner altogether ceased, and other new
customes came in their place; because not onely people died,
without having any women about them, but infinites also past out
of this life, not having any witnesse, how, when, or in what manner
they departed. So that few or none there were, to deliver outward
shew of sorrow and grieving: but insteed thereof, divers declared
idle joy and rejoycing, a use soone learned of immodest women,
having put off all feminine compassion, yea, or regard of their
owne welfare.
Very few also would accompany the body to the grave, and they
not any of the Neighbours, although it had beene an honourable
Citizen, but onely the meanest kinde of people, such as were gravemakers,
coffin-bearers, or the like, that did these services onely for
money, and the beere being mounted on their shoulders, in all hast
they would runne away with it, not perhaps to the Church
appointed by the dead, but to the neerest at hand, having some
foure or sixe poore Priests following, with lights or no lights, and
those of the silliest; short service being said at the buriall, and the
body unreverently throwne into the first open grave they found.
Such was the pittifull misery of poore people, and divers, who
were of better condition, as it was most lamentable to behold;
because the greater number of them, under hope of healing, or
compelled by poverty, kept still within their house weake and
faint, thousands falling sicke daily, and having no helpe, or
being succoured any way with foode or physicke, all of them died,
few or none escaping.
Great store there were, that died in the streetes by day or night,
and many more beside, although they died in their houses; yet first
they made it knowne to their neighbours, that their lives perished,
rather by the noysome smell of dead and putrified bodies, then by
any violence of the disease in themselves. So that of these and the
rest, dying in this manner every where, the neighbours observed
one course of behaviour, (moved thereto no lesse by feare, that the
smell and corruption of dead bodies should harme them, then
18
charitable respect of the dead) that themselves when they could, or
being assisted by some bearers of coarses, when they were able to
procure them, would hale the bodies (already dead) out of their
houses, laying them before their doores, where such as passed by,
especially in the mornings, might see them lying in no meane
numbers. Afterward, Bieres were brought thither, and such as
might not have the helpe of Bieres, were glad to lay them on tables;
and Bieres have bin observed, not onely to be charged with two or
three dead bodies at once, but many times it was seene also, that
the wife with the husband, two or three Brethren together; yea, the
Father and the Mother, have thus beene carried along to the grave
upon one Biere.
Moreover, oftentimes it hath beene seene, that when two Priests
went with one Crosse to fetch the body; there would follow
(behind) three or foure bearers with their Bieres, and when the
Priests intended the buriall but of one body, sixe or eight more
have made up the advantage, and yet none of them being attended
by any seemly company, lights, teares, or the very least decencie,
but it plainly appeared, that the very like account was then made
of Men or Women, as if they had bene Dogges or Swine. Wherein
might manifestly bee noted, that that which the naturall course of
things could not shew to the wise, with rare and little losse, to wit,
the patient support of miseries and misfortunes, even in their
greatest height: not onely the wise might now learne, but also the
very simplest people; and in such sort, that they should alwaies bee
prepared against all infelicities whatsoever.
Hallowed ground could not now suffice, for the great multitude of
dead bodies, which were daily brought to every Church in the
City, and every houre in the day; neither could the bodies have
proper place of buriall, according to our ancient custome:
wherefore, after that the Churches and Church-yards were filled,
they were constrained to make use of great deepe ditches, wherein
they were buried by hundreds at once, ranking dead bodies along
in graves, as Merchandizes are laide along in ships, covering each
after other with a small quantity of earth, and so they filled at last
up the whole ditch to the brim.
Now, because I would wander no further in everie particularity,
concerning the miseries happening in our Citie: I tell you, that
extremities running on in such manner as you have heard, little
lesse spare was made in the Villages round about; wherein (setting
aside enclosed Castles which were now filled like to small Cities)
poore Labourers and Husband-men, with their whole Families,
19
dyed most miserably in outhouses, yea, and in the open fieldes
also; without any assistance
of physicke, or helpe of servants; and likewise in the high-wayes,
or their ploughed landes, by day or night indifferently, yet not as
men, but like brute beasts.
By meanes whereof, they became lazie and slothfull in their dayly
endevours, even like to our Citizens; not minding or medling with
their wonted affaires: but, as a waiting for death every houre,
imployed all their paines, not in caring any way for themselves,
their cattle, or gathering the fruits of the earth, or any of their
accustomed labours; but rather wasted and consumed, even such
as were for their instant sustenance. Whereupon, it fell so out, that
their Oxen, Asses, Sheepe, and Goates, their Swine, Pullen, yea
their verie Dogges, the truest and faithfullest servants to men,
being beaten and banished from their houses, went wildly
wandring abroad in the fields, where the Corne grew still on the
ground without gathering, or being so much as reapt or cut. Many
of the foresaid beasts (as endued with reason) after they had
pastured themselves in the day time, would returne full fed at
night home to their houses, without any government of
Heardsmen, or any other.
How many faire Palaces! How many goodly Houses! How many
noble habitations, filled before with families of Lords and Ladies,
were then to be seene emptie, without any one there dwelling,
except some silly servant? How many Kindreds, worthy of
memory! How many great inheritances! And what plenty of riches;
were left without any true successours? How many good men!
How many woorthy Women! How many valiant and comely
young men, whom none but Galen, Hippocrates, and Aeesculapius
(if they were living) could have bene reputed
any way unhealthfull; were seene to dine at morning with
their Parents, Friends, and familiar confederates, and went to sup
in another world with their Predecessors? It is no meane breach to
my braine, to make repetition of so many miseries; wherefore,
being willing to part with them as easily as I may: I say that our
Citie being in this case, voide of inhabitants, it came to passe (as
afterward I understoode by some of good credite) that in the
venerable Church of S. Marie la Neufue, on a Tuesday morning,
there being then no other person, after the hearing of divine
Service, in mourning habits (as the season required) returned
thence seven discrete young Gentlewomen, all allyed together,
either by friendship, neighbor-hood, or parentage. She among
20
them that was most entred into yeares, exceeded not eight and
twenty; and the yongest was no lesse then eighteene; being of
Noble descent, faire forme, adorned with exquisite behaviour, and
gracious modesty.
Their names I could report, if just occasion did not forbid it, in
regard of the occasions following by them related, and because
times heereafter shall not taxe them with reproofe; the lawes of
pleasure being more straited now adayes (for the matters before
revealed) then at that time they were, not onely to their yeares but
to many much riper. Neither will I likewise minister matter to rash
heades (overreadie in censuring commendable life) any way to
impaire the honestie of Ladies, by their idle detracting speeches.
And therefore, to the end that what each of them saith, may be
comprehended without confusion; I purpose to stile them by
names,
wholly agreeing, or (in part) conformable to their qualities. The
first and most aged, we will name Pampinea; the second Fiametta;
the third Philamena; the fourth Aemilia; the fift Lauretta; the sixt
Neiphila; and the last we terme (not without occasion) Elissa, or
Eliza. All of them being assembled at a corner of the Church, not
by any deliberation formerly appointed, but meerely by accident,
and sitting, as it were in a round ring: after divers sighs severelly
delivered, they conferred on sundry matters answerable to the sad
qualitie of the time, and within a while after, Madam Pampinea
began in this manner.
Faire Ladies, you may (no doubt as well as I) have often heard, that
no injury is offered to any one, by such as make use but of their
owne right. It is a thing naturall for everie one which is borne in
this World, to aide, conserve, and defend her life so long as shee
can; and this right hath bene so powerfully permitted, that
although it hath sometimes happened, that (to defend themselves)
men have beene slaine without any offence: yet Lawes have
allowed it to be so, in whose solicitude lieth the best living of all
mortals. How much more honest and just is it then for us, and for
every other well-disposed person, to seeke for (without wronging
any) and to practise all remedies that wee can, for the conservation
of our lives? When I well consider, what we have heere done this
morning, and many other already past (remembring (withall) what
likewise is proper and convenient for us:) I conceive (as all you
may do the like) that everie one of us hath a due respect of her
selfe, and then I mervaile not, but rather am much amazed
(knowing none of us to be deprived of a Womans best judgement)
that wee seeke not after
21
some remedies for our selves, against that, which everie one among
us, ought (in reason) to feare.
Heere we meete and remaine (as it seemeth to mee) in no other
manner, then as if we would or should be witnesses, to all the dead
bodies at rest in their grave; or else to listen, when the religious
Sisters heere dwelling (whose number now are well-neere come to
bee none at all) sing Service at such houres as they ought to doe; or
else to acquaint all commers hither (by our mourning habits) with
the quality and quantitie of our hearts miseries. And when we part
hence, we meete with none but dead bodies; or sicke persons
transported from one place to another; or else we see running
thorow the City (in most offensive fury) such as (by authoritie of
publike Lawes) were banished hence, onely for their bad and
brutish behaviour in contempt of those Lawes, because now they
know, that the executors of them are dead and sicke. And if not
these, more lamentable spectacles present themselves to us, by the
base rascality of the City; who being fatted with our blood, tearme
themselves Grave-makers, and in meere contemptible mockeries of
us, are mounted on horsebacke, gallopping every where,
reproaching us with our losses and misfortunes, with lewd and
dishonest songs: so that we can heare nothing else but such and
such are dead, and such and such lie a dying: here hands wringing,
and every where most pittifull complaining.
If we returne home to our houses (I know not whether your case be
answerable to mine) when I can finde none of all my Family, but
onely my poore waiting Chamber-maide; so great are my feares,
that the very haire on my head declareth
my amazement, and wheresoever I go or sit downe, methinkes I
see the ghostes and shadowes of deceased friends, not with such
lovely lookes as I was wont to behold them, but with most horrid
and dreadfull regards, newly stolne upon them I know not how. In
these respects, both heere, else-where, and at home in my house,
methinkes I am alwaies ill, and much more (in mine owne opinion)
then any other body, not having meanes or place of retirement, as
all we have, and none to remaine heere but onely we.
Moreover, I have often heard it said, that in tarrying or departing,
no distinction is made in things honest or dishonest; onely appetite
will be served; and be they alone or in company, by day or night,
they do whatsoever their appetite desireth: not secular persons
onely, but such as are recluses, and shut up within Monasteries,
breaking the Lawes of obedience, and being addicted to pleasures
of the flesh, are become lascivious and dissolute, making the world
22
beleeve, that whatsoever is convenient for other women, is no way
unbeseeming them, as thinking in that manner to escape.
If it be so, as manifestly it maketh shew of it selfe; What do we
here? What stay we for? And whereon do we dreame? Why are we
more respectlesse of our health, then all the rest of the Citizens?
Repute we our selves lesse precious then all the other? Or do we
beleeve, that life is linked to our bodies with stronger chaines, then
to others, and that therefore we should not feare any thing that
hath power to offend us? Wee erre therein, and are deceived. What
brutishnesse were it in us, if we should urge any such beleefe? So
often as we call to minde, what and
how many gallant yong men and women, have beene devoured by
this cruell pestilence; we may evidently observe a contrary
argument.
Wherefore, to the end, that by being over-scrupulous and carelesse,
we fall not into such danger, whence when we would (perhaps) we
cannot recover our selves by any meanes: I thinke it meete (if your
judgement therein shall jumpe with mine) that all of us as we are
(at least, if we will doe as divers before us have done, and yet dally
endeavour to doe) shunning death by the honest example of other,
make our retreate to our Country houses, wherewith all of us are
sufficiently furnished, and there to delight our selves as best we
may, yet without transgressing (in any act) the limits of reason.
There shall we heare the pretty birds sweetly singing, see the hilles
and plaines verdantly flouring; the Corne waving in the field like
the billowes of the Sea, infinite store of goodly trees, and the
Heavens more fairely open to us, then here we can behold them.
And although they are justly displeased, yet will they not there
deny us better beauties to gaze on, then the walles in our City
(emptied of Inhabitants) can affoord us.
Moreover, the Ayre is much fresh and cleere, and generally, there
is farre greater abundance of all things whatsoever, needefull at
this time for preservation of our health, and lesse offence or
mollestation then we find here.
And although Country people die, as well as heere our Citizens
doe, the griefe notwithstanding is so much the lesse, as the houses
and dwellers there are rare, in comparison of them in our City.
And beside, if we well observe it, here we forsake no particular
person, but rather we may tearme our selves forsaken; in regard
that our Husbands, Kinred, and Friends, either dying, or flying
from the dead, have left us alone in this great affliction, even as if
23
we were no way belonging unto them. And therefore, by following
this counsell, we cannot fall into any reprehension; whereas if we
neglect and refuse it, danger, distresse, and death (perhaps) may
ensue thereon.
Wherefore, if you thinke good, I would allow it for well done, to
take our waiting women, with all such things as are needfull for us,
and (as this day) betake our selves to one place, to morrow to
another, taking there such pleasure and recreation, as so sweete a
season liberally bestoweth on us. In which manner we may
remaine, till we see (if death otherwise prevent us not) what end
the gracious Heavens have reserved for us. I would have you also
to consider, that it is no lesse seemely for us to part hence honestly,
then a great number of other Women to remaine here immodestly.
The other Ladies and Gentlewomen, having heard Madam
Pampinea, not onely commended her counsell, but desiring also to
put it in execution; had already particularly consulted with
themselves, by what meanes they might instantly depart from
thence. Neverthelesse, Madam Philomena, who was very wise,
spake thus.
Albeit faire Ladies, the case propounded by Madam Pampinea
hath beene very well delivered; yet (for all that) it is against reason
for us to rush on, as we are overready to doe. Remember that we
are all women, and no one among us is so childish, but may
consider, that when wee shall be so assembled together, without
providence or conduct of some man, we can hardly governe
our selves. Wee are fraile, offensive, suspitious, weake spirited,
and fearefull: in regard of which imperfections, I greatly doubt (if
we have no better direction then our owne) this society will sooner
dissolve it selfe, and (perchance) with lesse honour to us, then if we
never had begunne it. And therefore it shall bee expedient for us,
to provide before we proceede any further. Madam Eliza hereon
thus replyed.
Most true it is, that men are the chiefe or head of women, and
without their order, sildome times do any matters of ours sort to
recommendable end. But what meanes shal we make for men? We
all know well enough, that the most part of our friends are dead,
and such as are living, some be dispersed heere, others there, into
divers places and companies, where we have no knowledge of
their being; and to accept of strangers, would seeme very
inconvenient: wherefore as we have such care of our health, so
should we bee as respective withall, in ordering our intention, that
24
wheresoever we ayme at our pleasure and contentment, reproofe
and scandall may by no meanes pursue us.
While this discourse thus held among the Ladies, three young
Gentlemen came foorth of the Church (yet not so young, but the
youngest had attained to five and twenty yeares:) in whom neyther
malice of the time, losse of friends or kindred, nor any fearefull
conceit in themselves, had the power to quench affection, but
(perhaps) might a little coole it, in regard of the queazie season.
One of them called himselfe Pamphilus, the second Philostratus,
and the last Dioneus. Each of them was very affable and well
conditioned, and walked abroad (for their greater
comfort in such a time of tribulation) to try if they could meete
with their fayre friends, who (happily) might all three be among
these seaven, and the rest kinne unto them in one degree or other.
No sooner were these Ladies espyed by them, but they met with
them also in the same advantage; whereupon Madam Pampinea
(amiably smiling) said.
See how graciously Fortune is favourable to our beginning, by
presenting our eyes with three so wise and worthy young
Gentlemen, who will gladly be our guides and servants, if wee doe
not disdaine them the office. Madam Neiphila began immediatly to
blush, because one of them had a Love in the company, and said;
Good Madam Pampinea take heed what you say, because (of mine
owne knowledge) nothing can be spoken but good of them all; and
I thinke them all to be absolutely sufficient for a farre greater
employment then is here intended: as being well worthy to keepe
company not onely with us, but them of more faire and precious
esteeme then we are. But because it appeareth plainly enough, that
they beare affection to some heere among us, I feare, if wee should
make the motion, that some dishonor or reproofe may ensue
thereby, and yet without blame either in us or them. That is
nothing at all, answered Madam Philomena, let me live honestly,
and my Conscience not checke me with any crime; speake then
who can to the contrary, God and truth shall enter armes for me. I
wish that they were as willing to come, as all we are to bid them
welcome: for truly (as Madam Pampinea saide) we may very well
hope, that Fortune will bee furtherous to our purposed journey.
The other Ladies hearing them speake in such manner, not only
were silent to themselves, but all with one accord and consent said,
that it were well done to call them, and to acquaint them with their
intention, entreating their company in so pleasant a voyage.
Whereupon, without any more words, Madam Pampinea
25
mounting on her feete (because one of the three was her Kinsman)
went towards them, as they stood respectively observing them; and
(with a pleasing countenance) giving them a gracious salutation,
declared to them their deliberation, desiring (in behalfe of all the
rest) that with a brotherly and modest mind, they would vouchsafe
to beare them company.
The Gentlemen imagined at the first apprehension, that this was
spoken in mockage of them; but when they better perceived that
her words tended to solenme earnest, they made answer, That they
were all hartily ready to doe them any service. And without any
further delaying, before they departed thence, took order for their
aptest furnishing with all convenient necessaries, and sent word to
the place of their first appointment. On the morrow, being
Wednesday, about breake of day, the Ladies, with certaine of their
attending Gentlewomen, and the three Gentlemen, having three
servants to waite on them, left the Citie to beginne their journey;
and having travelled about a leagues distance, arrived at the place
of their first purpose of stay, which was seated on a little hill,
distant (on all sides) from any high way, plentifully stored with
faire spreading Trees, affoording no meane delight to the eye. On
the top of all, stood a stately Palace, having a large and spacious
Court in the middest round engirt with Galleries, Hals, and Chambers,
every one separate alone by themselves, and beautified with
Pictures of admirable cunning. Nor was there any want of
Gardens, Meadowes, and other most pleasant Walkes, with Welles
and Springs of faire running waters, all encompassed with
branching Vines, fitter for curious and quaffing bibbers, then
women sober, and singularly modest.
This Pallace the company found fully fitted and prepared, the
beddes in the Chambers made and daintily ordred, thickly strewed
with variety of flowers, which could not but give them the greater
contentment. Dioneus, who (above the other) was a pleasant young
gallant, and full of infinite witty conceits, saide; Your wit (faire
Ladies) hath better guided us hither, then our providence: I know
not how you have determined to dispose of your cares; as for mine
owne, I left them at the Cittie gate, when I came thence with you:
and therefore let your resolution bee, to spend the time here in
smiles and singing, (I meane, as may fittest agree with your
dignity) or else give me leave to go seeke my sorrowes agains, and
so to remaine discontented in our desolate City. Madam Pampinea
having in like manner shaken off her sorrowes, delivering a
modest and bashfull smile, replyed in this manner.
26
Dioneus, well have you spoken, it is fit to live merrily, and no
other occasion made us forsake the sicke and sad Cittie. But,
because such things as are without meane or measure, are subject
to no long continuance: I, who began the motion, whereby this
societie is thus assembled, and ayme at the long lasting thereof,
doe hold it verie convenient, that wee should all agree, to have one
chiefe Commander
among us, in whom the care and providence should
consist, for direction of our merriment, performing honour and
obedience to the partie, as to our Patrone and sole Governour. And
because every one may feele the burthen of solicitude, as also the
pleasure of commanding, and consequently have a sensible taste of
both, whereby no envy may arise on any side, I could wish, that
each one of us (for a day onely) should feele both the burthen and
honour, and the person so to be advanced, shall receive it from the
election of us all. As for such as are to succeed, after him or her that
hath had the dayes of dominion, the party thought fit for
succession, must be named so soone as night approacheth. And
being in this eminency (according as he or she shall please) he may
order and dispose how long the time of his rule shall last, as also of
the place and maner, where best we may continue our delight.
These words were highly pleasing to them all, and by generall
voice, Madame Pampinea was chosen Queene for the first day.
Whereupon, Madame Philomena ranne presently to a Bay-tree,
because she had often heard what honor belonged to those
branches, and how worthy of honour they were, that rightfully
were crowned with them, plucking off divers branches, shee made
of them an apparant and honourable Chaplet, placing it (by
generall consent) upon her head; and this so long as their company
continued, manifested to all the rest, the signall of Dominion, and
Royall greatnesse.
After that Madame Pampinea was thus made Queen, she
commanded publique silence, and causing the Gentlemens three
servants, and the wayting women
also (being foure in number) to be brought before her, thus she
beganne. Because I am to give the first example to you all, whereby
proceeding on from good to better, our company may live in order
and pleasure, acceptable to all, and without shame to any; I create
Parmeno (servant to Dioneus) Maister of the Houshold, hee taking
the care and charge of all our Trayne, and for whatsoever
appertayneth to our Hall service. I appoint also, that Silisco servant
to Pamphilus, shall bee our Dispenser and Treasurer, erforming
27
that which Parmeno shal command him. Likewise that Tindaro
serve as Groome of the Chamber, to Philostratus his Master, and
the other two, when his fellowes impeached by their offices, cannot
be present. Misia my Chambermaid, and Licisca belonging to
Philomena, shall serve continually in the Kitchin, and diligently
make ready such Vyands, as shal be delivered them by Parmeno.
Chimera, waitingwoman to Lauretta, and Stratilia appertaining to
Fiammetta, shall have the charge and governement of the Ladies
Chambers, and preparing all places where we shall be present.
Moreover, we will and commaund everie one of them (as they
desire to deserve our grace) that wheresoever they goe or come, or
whatsoever they heare or see: they especially respect to bring us
tydings of them. After shee had summarily delivered them these
orders, very much commended of everie one, she arose fairely,
saying:
Heere we have Gardens, Orchardes, Medowes, and other places of
sufficient pleasure, where every one may sport and recreate
themselves: but so soone as the ninth houre striketh, then all to
meet here againe, to dine in the coole shade.
This jocund company having received licence from their Queene to
disport themselves, the Gentlemen walked with the Ladies into a
goodly Garden, making Chaplets and Nosegayes of divers flowers,
and singing silently to themselves.
When they had spent the time limitted by the Queene, they
returned into the house, where they found that Parmeno had
effectually executed his office. For, when they entred into the hall,
they saw the Tables covered with delicate white Napery, and the
glasses looking like silver, they were so transparantly cleere, all the
roome beside strewed with Flowers of Juniper. When the Queen
and all the rest had washed, according as Parmeno gave order, so
every one was seated at the Table: the Viands (delicately drest)
were served in, and excellent wines plentifully delivered, none
attending but the three servants, and little or no lowd Table-talke
passing among them.
Dinner being ended, and the Tables withdrawne (all the Ladies,
and the Gentlemen likewise, being skilfull both in singing and
dancing, and playing on instruments artificially) the Queene
commanded, that divers Instruments should be brought, and (as
she gave charge) Dioneus tooke a Lute, and Fiammetta a Violl de
gamba, and began to play an excellent daunce. Whereupon, the
Queene with the rest of the Ladies, and the other two young
Gentlemen (having sent their attending servants to dinner) paced
28
foorth a daunce very majestically. And when the dance was ended,
they sung sundry excellent Canzonets, outwearing so the time,
untill the Queene commanded them all to rest, because the houre
did necessarily require it. The Gentlemen having their Chambers
farre severed from the Ladies,
curiously strewed with flowers, and their beds adorned in
exquisite manner, as those of the Ladies were not a jotte inferiour
to them; the silence of the night bestowed sweet rest on them al. In
the morning, the Queene and all the rest being risen, accounting
over much sleepe to be very hurtfull, they walked abroad into a
goodly Meadow, where the grasse grew verdantly, and the beames
of the Sun heated not overviolently, because the shades of faire
spreading Trees, gave a temperate calmnesse, coole and gentle
winds fanning their sweet breath pleasingly among them. All of
them being there set downe in a round ring, and the Queen in the
middest, as being the appointed place of eminency, she spake:
You see (faire company) that the Sunne is highly mounted, the
heate (elsewhere) too extreme for us, and therefore here is our
fittest refuge, the ayre being so coole, delicate, and acceptable, and
our folly well worthy reprehension, if we should walke further,
and speede worse. Heere are Tables, Cards, and Chesse, as your
dispositions may bee addicted. But if mine advice might passe for
currant, I would admit none of those exercises, because they are
too troublesome both to them that play, and such as looke on. I
could rather wish, that some quaint discourse might passe among
us, a tale or fable related by some one, to urge the attention of all
the rest. And so wearing out the warmth of the day, one prety
Novell will draw on another, untill the Sun be lower declined, and
the heates extremity more diminished, to solace our selves in some
other place, as to our minds shall seeme convenient. If therefore
what I have sayde bee acceptable to you (I purposing to follow in
the same course of pleasure,) let it appeare by your immediate answere;
for, till the Evening, I thinke we can devise no exercise more
commodious for us.
The Ladies and Gentlemen allowed of the motion, to spend the
time in telling pleasant tales; whereupon the Queene saide: Seeing
you have approved mine advice, I grant free permission for this
first day, that every one shall relate, what to him or her is best
pleasing. And turning her selfe to Pamphilus (who was seated on
her right hand) gave him favour, with one of his Novels, to begin
the recreation: which he not daring to deny, and perceiving
generall attention prepared for him, thus he began.
29
THE FIRST DAY, THE FIRST NOVELL
WHEREIN IS CONTAINED, HOW HARD A THING IT IS, TO
DISTINGUISH GOODNESSE FROM HYPOCRISIE; AND HOW
(UNDER THE SHADOW OF HOLINESSE) THE WICKEDNESSE
OF ONE MAN, MAY DECEIVE MANY Messire Chappelet du
Prat, by making a false confession, beguyled an holy Religious
man, and after dyed. And having (during his life time) bene a very
bad man, at his death, was reputed for a saint, and called S.
Chappelet. It is a matter most convenient (deare Ladies) that a man
ought to begin whatsoever he doth, in the great and glorious name
of him, who was the Creator of all things. Wherefore, seeing that I
am the man appointed, to begin this your invention of discoursing
Novelties: I intend to begin also with one of his wonderfull workes.
To the end, that this being heard, our hope may remaine on him, as
the thing onely permanent, and his name for ever to be praised by
us. Now, as there is nothing more certaine, but that even as
temporall things are mortall and transitory, so are they both in and
out of themselves, full of sorrow, paine, and anguish, and
subjected to infinite dangers: So in the same manner, we live
mingled among them, seeming as part of them, and cannot
(without some error) continue or defend our selves, if God by his
especiall grace and favour, give us not strength and good
understanding. Which power we may not beleeve, that either it
descendeth
to us, or liveth in us, by any merites of our owne; but of his onely
most gracious benignity. Mooved neverthelesse and entreated by
the intercessions of them, who were (as we are) mortals; and
having diligently observed his commandements, are now with him
in eternall blessednes. To whom (as to advocates and procurators,
informed by the experience of our frailty) wee are not to present
our prayers in the presence of so great a Judge; but onely to
himselfe, for the obtaining of all such things as his wisedome
knoweth to be most expedient for us. And well may we credit, that
his goodnesse is more fully enclined towards us, in his continuall
bounty and liberality; then the subtilty of mortall eye, can reach
into the secret of so divine a thought: and sometimes therefore we
may be beguiled in opinion, by electing such and such as our
intercessors before his high Majesty, who perhaps are farre off
from him, or driven into perpetuall exile, as unworthy to appeare
in so glorious a presence. For he, from whom nothing can be
30
hidden, more regardeth the sincerity of him that prayeth, then
ignorant devotion, committed to the trust of a heedlesse
intercessor; and such prayers have alwaies gracious acceptation in
his sight. As manifestly will appeare, by the Novell which I intend
to relate; manifestly (I say) not as in the judgement of God, but
according to the apprehension of men.
There was one named, Musciatto Francesi, who from beeing a most
rich and great Merchant in France, was become a Knight, and
preparing to goe into Tuscany, with Mounsieur Charles without
Land, Brother to the King of France (who was desired and incited
to come thither by Pope Boniface) found his affaires
greatly intricated heere and there (as oftentimes the matters of
Merchants fall out to bee) and that very hardly hee should sodainly
unintangle them, without referring the charge of them to divers
persons. And for all he tooke indifferent good order, onely he
remained doubtfull, whom he might sufficiently leave, to recover
his debts among many Burgundians. And the rather was his care
the more heerein, because he knew the Burgundians to be people
of badde nature, rioters, brablers, full of calumny, and without any
faithfulnesse: so that he could not bethinke himselfe of any man
(how wicked soever he was) in whom he might repose trust to
meete with their lewdnesse. Having a long while examined his
thoughts upon this point, at last hee remembred one Master
Chappelet du Prat, who ofttimes had resorted to his house in Paris.
And because he was a man of little stature, yet handsome enough,
the French not knowing what this word Chappelet might meane,
esteeming he should be called rather (in their tongue) Chappell;
imagined, that in regard of his small stature, they termed him
Chappelet, and not Chappell, and so by the name of Chappelet he
was every where known, and by few or none acknowledged for
Chappell.
This Master Chappelet, was of so good and commendable life; that,
being a Notarie, he held it in high disdaine, that any of his
Contractes (although he made but few) should be found without
falshoode. And looke how many soever hee dealt withall, he
would be urged and required thereto, offering them his paines and
travaile for nothing, but to bee requited otherwise then by money;
which prooved to bee his much larger recompencing, and returned
to him the farre
greater benefit. Hee tooke the onely pleasure of the world, to beare
false witnesse, if hee were thereto entreated, and (oftentimes) when
hee was not requested at all.
31
Likewise because in those times, great trust and beleefe was given
to an oath, he making no care or conscience to be perjured: greatly
advantaged himselfe by Law suites, in regard that many matters
relyed upon his oath, and delivering the truth according to his
knowledge.
He delighted (beyond measure) and addicted his best studies, to
cause enmities and scandals betweene kindred and friends, or any
other persons, agreeing well together; and the more mischiefe he
could procure in this kind, so much the more pleasure and delight
tooke he therein. If he were called to kill any one, or to do any
other villanous deede, he never would make deniall, but go to it
very willingly; and divers times it was well knowen, that many
were cruelly beaten, ye slaine by his hands. Hee was a most
horrible blasphemer of God and his Saints, upon the very least
occasion, as being more addicted to choller, then any other man
could be. Never would he frequent the Church, but basely
contemned it, with the Sacraments and religious rites therein
administred, accounting them for vile and unprofitable things: but
very voluntarily would visit Tavernes, and other places of
dishonest accesse, which were continually pleasing unto him, to
satisfie his lust and inordinate lubricitie. Hee would steale both in
publike and private, even with such a conscience, as if it were
given to him by nature so to do. He was a great glutton and a
drunkarde, even he was not able to take any more: being also
a continuall gamester, and carrier of false Dice, to cheate with them
the very best Friends he had.
But why do I waste time in such extent of words? When it may
suffice to say, that never was there a worse man borne; whose
wickednesse was for long time supported, by the favour, power,
and Authoritie of Monsieur Musciatto, for whose sake many
wrongs and injuries were patiently endured, as well by private
persons (whom hee would abuse notoriously) as others of the
Court, betweene whom he made no difference at all in his vile
dealing. This Master Chappelet, being thus remembred by
Musciatto (who very well knew his life and behaviour) he perfectly
perswaded himselfe, that this was a man apt in all respects, to
meete with the treachery of the Burgundians: whereupon, having
sent for him, thus he beganne.
Chappelet, thou knowest how I am wholly to retreate my selfe
from hence, and having some affaires among the Burgundians,
men full of wickednesse and deceite; I can bethinke my selfe of no
meeter a man then Chappelet, to recover such debts as are due to
32
mee among them. And because it falleth out so well, that thou art
not now hindered by any other businesse; if thou wilt undergoe
this office for me, I will procure thee favourable Letters from the
Court, and give thee a reasonable portion in all thou recoverest.
Master Chappelet, seeing himselfe idle, and greedy after worldly
goods, considering that Mounsieur Musciatto (who had beene
alwayes his best buckler) was now to depart from thence, without
any
dreaming on the matter, and constrained thereto (as it were) by
necessity, set downe his resolution, and answered, that hee would
gladly doe it.
Having made their agreement together, and received from
Musciatto his expresse procuration, and also the Kings gracious
Letters; after that Musciatto was gone on his journey, Master
Chappelet went to Dijon, where he was unknowne (well-neere) of
any. And there (quite from his naturall disposition) he beganne
benignely and graciously, in recovering the debts due; which
course he tooke the rather, because they should have a further
feeling of him in the end. Being lodged in the house of two
Florentine brethren, that living on their monies usance; and (for
Mounsieur Musciattoes sake) using him with honour and respect: it
fortuned that he fell sicke, and the two brethren sent for Physitions
to attend him, allowing their servants to be diligent about him,
making no spare of any thing, which gave the best likelyhood of
restoring his health. But all their paines proved to no purpose,
because he (honest man) being now growne aged, and having lived
all his life time very disorderly, fell day by day (according to the
Physicions judgement) from bad to worse, as no other way
appeared but death, whereat the brethren greatly grieved.
Upon a day, neere to the Chamber where the sicke man lay, they
entred into this communication. What shall we doe (quoth the one
to the other) with this man? We are much hindered by him: for to
send him away (sicke as he is) we shall be greatly blamed thereby,
and it will be a manifest note of our weake wisedome; the people
knowing that first of all we gave him entertainement, and have
allowed him honest physicall attendance, and he not having any
way injuried or offended us, to let him be suddenly expulsed our
house (sicke to death as he is) it can be no way for our credit.
On the other side, we are to consider also, that hee hath bin so
badde a man, as he will not now make any confession thereof,
neither receive the blessed Sacrament of the Church, and dying so
without confession; there is no Church that will accept his body,
33
but it must be buried in prophane ground, like to a Dogge. And yet
if hee would confesse himselfe, his sinnes are so many and
monstrous, as the like case also may happen, because there is not
any Priest or Religious person, that can or will absolve him. And
being not absolved, he must be cast into some ditch or pit, and then
the people of the Towne, as well in regard of the account we carry
heere, (which to them appeareth so little pleasing, as we are daily
pursued with their worst words) as also coveting our spoile and
overthrow, upon this accident will cry out and mutiny against us;
Behold these Lombard dogs, which are not to be received into the
Church, why should we suffer them to live heere among us? In
furious madnesse will they come upon us, and our house, where
(peradventure) not contended with robbing us of our goods, our
lives will remaine in their mercy and danger; so that, in what sort
soever it happen, this mans dying here, must needs be banefull to
us.
Master Chappelet, who (as we have formerly saide) was lodged
neere to the place where they thus conferred, having a subtle
attention (as oftentimes we see
sicke persons to be possessed withall) heard all these speeches
spoken of him, and causing them to bee called unto him, thus hee
spake.
I would not have you to be any way doubtfull of me; neither that
you should receive the least damage by me: I have heard what you
have said, and am certaine, that it will happen according to your
words, if matters should fall out as you conceite; but I am minded
to deale otherwise. I have committed so many offences against our
Lord God, in the whole current of my life; that now I intend one
action at the houre of my death, which I trust will make amends for
all. Procure therefore, I pray you, that the most holy and religious
man that is to be found (if there bee any one at all) may come unto
me, and referre the case then to me, for I will deale in such sort for
you and my selfe, that all shall be well, and you no way
discontented.
The two Brethren, although they had no great hope in his speeches,
went yet to a Monastery of Gray-Friars, and requested; that some
one holy and learned man, might come to heare the confession of a
Lombard, that lay very weake and sicke in their house. And one
was granted unto them, being an aged religious Frier, a great read
master in the sacred Scripture, a very venerable person, who being
of good and sanctified life, all the Citizens held him in great
respect and esteeme, and on hee went with them to their house.
34
When he was come up into the Chamber where Master Chappelet
lay, and being there seated downe by him; he beganne first to
comfort him very lovingly, demanding also of him, how many
times he had bin at confession? Whereto Master Chappelet (who
never had bin shrived in all his life time) thus replied.
Holy Father, I alwayes used (as a common custome) to bee
confessed once (at the least) every weeke, albeit sometimes much
more often; but true it is, that being falne into this sicknesse, now
eight daies since I have not beene confest, so violent hath bene the
extremity of my weaknesse. My sonne (answered the good old
man) thou hast done well, and so keep thee still hereafter in that
minde: but I plainly perceive, seeing thou hast so often confessed
thy selfe, that I shall take the lesse labour in urging questions to
thee.
Master Chappelet replyed; Say not so good Father, for albeit I have
bene so oftentimes confessed, yet am I willing now to make a
generall confession, even of all sinnes comming to my
remembrance, from the very day of my birth, until this instant
houre of my shrift. And therefore I entreat you (holy Father) to
make a particular demand of everie thing, even as if I had never
bene confessed at all, and to make no respect of my sicknesse: for I
had rather be offensive to mine owne flesh, then by favoring or
allowing it ease, to hazard the perdition of my soule, which my
Redeemer bought with so precious a price.
These words were highly pleasing to the holy Friar, and seemed to
him as an argument of a good conscience: Wherefore, after hee had
much commended this forwardnesse in him, he began to demand
of him if he had never offended with any Woman? Whereunto
master Chappelet (breathing forth a great sigh) answered.
Holy Father, I am halfe ashamed to tell you the truth in this case, as
fearing least I should sinne in vaine-glory. Whereto the Confessor
replyed; Speake boldly sonne, and feare not, for in telling the truth,
bee it in confession or otherwise, a man can never sinne. Then
sayde Maister Chappelet, Father, seeing you give me so good an
assurance, I will resolve you faithfully heerein. I am so true a
Virginman in this matter, even as when I issued forth of my
mothers Wombe. O sonne (quoth the Friar) how happy and blessed
of God art thou? Well hast thou lived, and therein hast thou not
meanly merited, having had so much libertie to doe the contrary if
thou wouldest, wherein verie few of us can so answer for our
selves.
35
Afterward, he demanded of him, how much displeasing to God
hee had beene in the sinne of Gluttony? When (sighing againe
greatly) hee answered: Too much, and too often, good Father. For,
over and beside the Fasts of our Lent season, which everie yeare
ought to bee duely observed by devout people, I brought my selfe
to such a customarie use, that I could fast three dayes in every
Weeke, with Bread and Water. But indeede (holy Father) I
confesse, that I have drunke water with such a pleasing appetite
and delight (especially in praying, or walking on pilgrimages) even
as greedy drunkards doe, in drinking good Wine. And many times
I have desired such Sallades of small hearbes, as Women do gather
abroad in the open fields, and feeding onely upon them, without
coveting after any other kinde of sustenance, hath seemed much
more pleasing to me, then I thought to agree with the nature of
Fasting, especially, when as it swerveth from devotion, or is not
done as it ought to bee.
Sonne, Sonne, replied the Confessour, these sinnes are naturall, and
very light, and therefore I would not have thee to charge thy
conscience with them, more then is needfull. It happeneth to every
man (how holy soever he be) that after he hath fasted overlong,
feeding will be welcome to him, and drinking good drinke after his
travaile. O Sir, (said Maister Chappelet) never tell me this to
comfort me, for well you know, and I am not ignorant therein, that
such things as are done for the service of God, ought all to be
performed purely, and without any blemish of the minde; what
otherwise is done, savoureth of sinne. The Friar being well
contented with his words, said: It is not amisse that thou
understandest it in this manner, and thy conscience thus purely
cleared, is no little comfort to me.
But tell me now concerning Avarice, hast thou sinned therein, by
desiring more then was reasonable, or withholding from others,
such things as thou oughtst not to detaine? Wherein Maister
Chappelet answered. Good Father, I would not have you to
imagine, because you see me lodged heere in the house of two
Usurers, that therefore I am of any such disposition. No truely Sir, I
came hither to no other end, but onely to chastise and admonish
them in friendly manner, to clense their mindes from such
abhominable profit: And assuredly, I should have prevailed
therein, had not this violent sicknesse hindered mine intention. But
understand (holy Father) that my parents left me a rich man, and
immediatly after my Fathers death, the greater part of his goods I
gave away for Gods sake, and then, to sustaine mine owne life, and
to helpe the poore members of Jesus Christ, I betooke my selfe to a
36
meane estate of Merchandise, desiring none other then honest
gaine thereby, and evermore whatsoever benefit came to me; I
imparted halfe
thereof to the poore, converting mine owne small portion about my
necessary affaires, which that other part would scarcely serve to
supply: yet alwayes God gave thereto such a mercifull blessing,
that my businesse dayly thrived more and more, arising still from
good to better.
Well hast thou done therein good Sonne, said the Confessour: but
how oftentimes hast thou beene angry? Oh Sir (said Maister
Chappelet) therein I assure yee, I have often transgressed. And
what man is able to forbeare it; beholding the dayly actions of men
to be so dishonest? No care of keeping Gods Commandements, nor
any feare of his dreadfull judgements. Many times in a day, I have
rather wished my selfe dead then living, beholding youth pursuing
idle vanities, to sweare and forsweare themselves, tipling in
Tavernes, and never haunting Churches; but rather affecting the
worlds follies, then any such duties as they owe to God. Alas
Sonne (quoth the Friar) this is a good and holy anger, and I can
impose no penance on thee for it. But tell me, hath not rage or furie
at any time so over-ruled thee, as to commit murther or manslaughter,
or to speake evill of any man, or to doe any other such
kinde of injurie? Oh Father (answered Maister Chappelet) you that
seeme to be a man of God, how dare you use any such vile words?
If I had had the very least thought, to doe any such act as you
speake, doe you thinke that God would have suffered me to live?
These are deeds of darknesse, fit for villaines and wicked livers, of
which hellish crew, when at any time I have happened to meet
with some one of them, I have said; God, God convert thee.
Worthy, and charitable words, replied the Friar: but tell me Sonne,
Didst thou ever beare false witnes against any man, or hast spoken
falsly, or taken ought from any one, contrary to the will of the
owner? Yes indeed Father, said Maister Chappelet, I have spoken
ill of another, because I have sometime seene one of my neighbors,
who with no meane shame of the world, would do nothing else but
beat his wife: and of him once I complained to the poore mans
parents, saying, that he never did it but when he was overcome
with drinke. Those were no ill words, quoth the Friar; but I
remember you said, that you were a Merchant: Did you ever
deceive any, as some Merchants use to doe? Truely Father,
answered M.
37
Chappelet, I thinke not any, except one man, who one day brought
me money which he owed me for a certaine peece of cloath I sold
him, and I put it into a purse without accounting it. About a
moneth afterward, I found that there were foure small pence more
then was due to mee: and never happening to meete with the man
againe, after I had kept them the space of a whole yeare, I then
gave them away unto foure poore people, for Gods sake.
A small matter, said the Friar, and truly payed backe againe to the
owner, in bestowing them on the poore. Many other questions he
demanded of him, whereto still he answered in the same manner.
But before he proceeded to absolution, Master Chappelet spake
thus: I have yet one sinne more, which I have not revealed to you:
when being urged by the Friar to confesse it, he said. I remember,
that I should afford one day in the weeke, to cleanse the house of
my soule, for better entertainement to my Lord and Saviour, and
yet I have done no such reverence
to the Sunday or Sabbath, as I ought to have done. A small
fault Sonne, replyed the Friar. O no (quoth Master Chappelet) doe
not terme it a small fault, because Sunday being a holy day, is
highly to be reverenced: for as on that day, our blessed Lord arose
from death to life. But (quoth the Confessor) hast thou done
nothing else on that day? Yes, said he, being forgetfull of my selfe,
once I did spet in Gods Church. The Friar smiling, said: Alas
Sonne, that is a matter of no moment; for wee that are Religious
persons, doe use to spet there every day. The more is your shame,
answered Master Chappelet, for no place ought to bee kept more
pure and cleane then the sacred Temple, wherein our daily
sacrifices are offered up to God.
In this manner he held on an houre and more, uttering the like
transgressions as these; and at last began to sigh very passionately,
and to shed a few teares, as one that was skilfull enough in such
dissembling pranks: whereat the Confessor being much mooved,
saide: Alas Sonne, what aylest thou? Oh Father (quoth Chappelet)
there remaineth yet one sinne more upon my conscience, wherof I
never at any time made confession, so shamefull it appeareth to
mee to disclose it; and I am partly perswaded, that God will never
pardon me for that sinne. How now Sonne? said the Friar, never
say so; for if all the sinnes that ever were committed by men, or
shall be committed so long as the World endureth, were onely in
one man, and he repenting them, and being so contrite for them, as
I see thou art; the grace and mercy of God is so great, that upon
penitent confession, he will freely pardon him, and therefore spare
not to speake it boldly. Alas Father (said
38
Chappelet, still in pretended weeping) this sinne of mine is so
great, that I can hardly beleeve (if your earnest prayers do not
assist me) that ever I shall obtaine remission for it. Speake it Sonne,
said the Friar, and feare not, I promise that I will pray to God for
thee.
Master Chappelet still wept and sighed, and continued silent,
notwithstanding all the Confessors comfortable perswasions; but
after hee had helde him a long while in suspence, breathing forth a
sighe, even as if his very heart would have broken, he saide; Holy
Father, seeing you promise to pray to God for me, I will reveale it
to you: Know then, that when I was a little boy, I did once curse
my Mother; which he had no sooner spoken, but he wrung his
hands, and greeved extraordinarily. Oh good Son, saide the Friar:
doth that seeme so great a sinne to thee? Why, men doe daily
blaspheme our Lord God, and yet neverthelesse, upon their hearty
repentance, he is alwayes ready to forgive them; and wilt not thou
beleeve to obtaine remission, for a sinne so ignorantly committed?
Weepe no more deare Sonne, but comfort thy selfe and rest
resolved, that if thou wert one of them, who nayled our blessed
Saviour to his Crosse; yet being so truly repentant, as I see thou art,
he would freely forgive thee. Say you so Father? quoth Chappelet.
What mine owne deare Mother? that bare me in her wombe nine
moneths, day and night, and afterwards fed me with her breasts a
thousand times, can I be pardoned for cursing her? Oh no, it is too
haynous a sinne, and except you pray to God very instantly for me,
he will not forgive me.
When the religious man perceived, that nothing more was to bee
confessed by Master Chappelet; he gave him absolution, and his
owne benediction beside, reputing him to be a most holy man, as
verily beleeving all that hee had said. And who would not have
done the like, hearing a man to speake in this manner, and being
upon the very point of death? Afterward, he saide unto him,
Master Chappelet, by Gods grace you may be soone restored to
health, but if it so come to passe, that God doe take your blessed
and well disposed soule to his mercy, will it please you to have
your body buried in our Convent? Whereto Master Chappelet
answered; I thanke you Father for your good motion, and sorry
should I be, if my friends did bury me any where else, because you
have promised to pray to God for me; and beside, I have alwayes
carried a religious devotion to your Order.
Wherefore, I beseech you, so soone as you are come home to your
Convent, prevaile so much by your good meanes, that the holy
Eucharist, consecrated this morning on your high Altar, may be
39
brought unto me: for although I confesse my selfe utterly
unworthy, yet I purpose (by your reverend permission) to receive
it, as also your holy and latest unction, to this ende, that having
lived a greevous sinner, I may yet (at the last) die a Christian.
These words were pleasing to the good olde man, and he caused
every thing to be performed, according as Master Chappelet had
requested.
The two Brethren, who much doubted the dissembling of
Chappelet, being both in a small partition, which sundered the
sicke mans Chamber from theirs, heard and understood the
passage of all, betweene him and the ghostly Father, being
many times scarcely able to refraine from laughter, at the
fraudulent course of his confession. And often they said within
themselves, What manner of man is this, whom neither age,
sickenesse, nor terror of death so neere approaching, and sensible
to his owne soule, nor that which is much more, God, before whose
judgement he knowes not how soone he shall appeare, or else be
sent to a more fearefull place; none of these can alter his wicked
disposition, but that he will needes die according as he hath lived?
Notwithstanding, seeing he had so ordered the matter, that he had
buriall freely allowed him, they cared for no more.
After that Chappelet had received the Communion, and the other
Ceremonies appointed for him; weakenesse encreasing on him
more and more, the very same day of his goodly confession, he
died (not long after) towards the evening. Whereupon the two
Brethren tooke order, that all needefull things should be in a
readinesse, to have him buried honourably; sending to acquaint the
Fathers of the Convent therewith, that they might come to say their
Vigilles, according to precedent custome, and then on the morrow
to fetch the body. The honest Friar that had confessed him, hearing
he was dead, went to the Prior of the Convent, and by sound of the
house Bell, caused all the Brethren to assemble together, giving
them credibly to understand, that Master Chappelet was a very
holy man, as appeared by all the parts of his confession, and made
no doubt, but that many miracles would be wrought by his
sanctified body, perswading them to fetch it thither with all
devoute solemnity and reverence: whereto the Prior, and all the
credulous Brethren presently condiscended very gladly.
When night was come, they went all to visit the dead body of
Master Chappelet, where they used an especiall and solemne
Vigill; and on the morrow, apparelled in their richest Coapes and
Vestiments, with bookes in their hands, and the Crosse borne
40
before them, singing in the forme of a very devoute procession,
they brought the body pompeously into their Church,
accompanied with all the people of the Towne, both men and
women. The Father Confessor, ascending up into the Pulpit,
preached wonderfull things of him, and the rare holinesse of his
life; his fastes, his virginity, simplicity, innocency, and true
sanctity, recounting also (among other especiall observations) what
Chappelet had confessed, as this most great and greevous sinne,
and how hardly he could be perswaded, that God would grant him
pardon for it. Whereby he tooke occasion to reprove the people
then present, saying; And you (accursed of God) for the verie least
and trifling matter hapning, will not spare to blaspheme God, his
blessed Mother, and the whole Court of heavenly Paradise: Oh,
take example by this singular man, this Saintlike man, nay, a very
Saint indeede.
Many additions more he made, concerning his faithfulnesse, truth,
and integrity; so that, by the vehement asseveration of his words
(whereto all the people there present gave credible beleefe) he
provoked them unto such zeale and earnest devotion; that the
Sermon was no sooner ended, but (in mighty crowds and throngs)
they pressed about the Biere, kissing his hands and feete, and all
the garments about him were torne in peeces, as precious Reliques
of so holy a person, and happy they thought themselves, that could
get the smallest peece or shred of
any thing that came neere to his body: and thus they continued all
the day, the body lying still open, to be visited in this manner.
When night was come, they buried him in a goodly Marble tombe,
erected in a faire Chappell purposely; and for many dayes after
following, it was most strange to see, how the people of the
Country came thither on heapes, with holy Candles and other
offerings, with Images of waxe fastened to the Tombe, in signe of
Sacred and solemne Vowes, to this new created Saint. And so farre
was spread the fame and renowne of his sanctity, devotion, and
integrity of life, maintained constantly by the Fathers of the
Convent; that if any one fell sicke in neede, distresse, or adversity,
they would make their Vowes to no other Saint but him: naming
him (as yet to this day they do) Saint Chappelet, affirming upon
their Oathes, that infinite miracles were there daily performed by
him, and especially on such, as came in devotion to visit his shrine.
In this manner lived and died Master Chappelet du Prat, who
before he became a Saint, was as you have heard: and I will not
deny it to be impossible, but that he may bee at rest among other
41
blessed bodies. For although he lived lewdly and wickedly, yet
such might be his contrition in the latest extreamity, that
(questionlesse) he might finde mercie. But, because such things
remaine unknowne to us, and speaking by outward appearance,
vulgar judgement will censure otherwise of him, and thinke him to
be rather in perdition, then in so blessed a place as Paradice. But
referring that to the Omnipotents appointment, whose clemencie
hath alwayes beene so great to us, that he regards not our errors,
but the integrity
of our Faith, making (by meanes of our continuall Mediator) of an
open enemy, a converted sonne and servant. And as I began in his
name, so will I conclude, desiring that it may evermore be had in
due reverence, and referre we our selves thereto in all our
necessities, with this setled assurance, that he is alwayes ready to
heare us. And so he ceased.
42
THE FIRST DAY, THE SECOND NOVELL
WHEREIN IS CONTAINED AND EXPRESSED, THE LIBERALITY
AND GOODNESSE OF GOD, EXTENDED TO THE CHRISTIAN
FAITH Abraham a Jew, being admonished or advised by a friend
of his, named Jehannot de Chevigny, travailed from Paris unto
Rome: And beholding there the wicked behaviour of men in the
Church, returned backe to Paris againe, where yet (neverthelesse)
he became a Christian. The Novell recited by Pamphilus, was
highly pleasing to the company, and much commended by the
Ladies: and after it had beene diligently observed among them, the
Queene commanded Madam Neiphila (who was seated neerest to
Pamphilus) that, in relating another of hers, she should follow on
in the pastime thus begun. She being no lesse gracious in
countenance, then merrily disposed; made answere, that shee
would obey her charge, and began in this manner.
Pamphilus hath declared to us, by his Tale, how the goodnesse of
God regardeth not our errors, when they proceede from things
which wee cannot discerne. And I intend to approove by mine,
what argument of infallible truth, the same benignity delivereth of
it selfe, by enduring patiently the faults of them, that (both in word
and worke) should declare unfaigned testimony of such gracious
goodnesse, and not to live so dissolutely as they doe. To the end,
that others illumined by their light of life, may beleeve with the
stronger constancy of minde.
As I have heeretofore heard (Gracious Ladies) there lived a
wealthy Marchant in Paris, being a Mercer, or seller of Silkes,
named Jehannot de Chevigny, a man of faithfull, honest, and
upright dealing; who held great affection and friendship with a
very rich Jew, named Abraham, that was a Merchant also, and a
man of very direct conversation. Jehannot well noting the honesty
and loyall dealing of this Jew, began to have a Religious kinde of
compassion in his soule, much pittying that a man so good in
behaviour, so wise and discreete in all his actions, should be in
danger of perdition thorow want of Faith. In which regard,
lovingly he began to intreate him, that he would leave the errors of
his Jewish beleefe, and follow the truth of Christianity, which he
evidently saw (as being good and holy) daily to prosper and
enlarge it selfe, whereas on the contrary, his profession decreased,
and grew to nothing.
43
The Jew made answer, that he beleeved nothing to be so good and
holy, as the Jewish Religion, and having beene borne therein,
therein also he purposed to live and dye, no matter whatsoever
being able to remove him from that resolution. For all this stiffe
deniall, Jehannot would not so give him over; but pursued him still
day by day, reitterating continually his former speeches to him:
delivering infinite excellent and pregnant reasons, that Merchants
themselves were not ignorant, how farre the Christian faith
excelled the Jewish falshoods. And albeit the Jew was a very
learned man in his owne Law, yet notwithstanding the intire amity
he bare to Jehannot, or (perhaps) his words fortified by the blessed
Spirit, were so prevailant with him, that the Jew felt a pleasing
apprehension in them, though as
yet his obstinacie stoode farre off from Conversion. But as he thus
continued strong in opinion, so Jehannot lefte not hourely to labour
him: insomuch, that the Jew being conquered by such earnest and
continuall importunity, one day spake to Jehannot, saying.
My worthy friend Jehannot, thou art extremely desirous, that I
should convert to Christianitie, and I am well contented to doe it;
onely upon this condition: That first I wil journey to Rome, to see
him whom thou sayest, is Gods general Vicar here on earth, and to
consider on the course of his life and manners, and likewise of his
Colledge of Cardinals. If he and they doe appeare such men to
mee, as thy speeches affirme them to be, and thereby I may
comprehend that thy Faith and Religion is better then mine, as
with no meane paines thou endevourest to perswade mee, I will
become a Christian as thou art: but if I finde it otherwise, I will
continue as I am, a Jew.
Jehannot hearing these words, became exceeding sorrowfull, and
sayd within himselfe; I have lost all the paines which I did thinke
to be well employed, as hoping to have this man converted heere.
For, if he go to the Court of Rome, and behold there the wickednes
of the Priests lives, farewell all hope in me, of ever seeing him to
become a Christian. But rather, were he already a Christian,
without all question he would turne a Jew. And so going neerer to
Abraham, he said. Alas my loving friend, why shouldst thou
undertake such a tedious travel, and so great a charge, as thy
journey from hence to Rome will cost thee? Consider, that to a rich
man (as thou art) travaile by land or Sea is full of infinite dangers.
Doest thou
not thinke, that here are Religious men enow, who wil gladly
bestow Baptisme upon thee? To mee therefore it plainely
44
appeareth, that such a voyage is to no purpose. If thou standest
upon any doubt or scruple, concerning the faith whereto I wish
thee; where canst thou desire conference with greater Doctours, or
men more learned in all respects, then this famous Cittie doth
affoord thee, to resolve thee in any questionable case? Thou must
thinke, that the Prelates are such there, as heere thou seest them to
be, and yet they must needes be in much better condition at Rome,
because they are neere to the principall Pastor. And therefore, if
thou wilt credit my counsell, reserve this journey to some time
more convenient, when the Jubilee of generall Pardon happeneth,
and then (perchance) I will beare thee company, and go along with
thee as in vowed Pilgrimage.
Whereto the Jew replyed: I beleeve Jehannot that all which thou
hast said, may be so. But, to make short with thee, I am fully
determined (if thou wouldst have me a Christian, as thou instantly
urgest me to bee) to goe thither, for otherwise, I will continue as I
am. Jehannot perceyving his setled purpose, said: Goe then in Gods
name. But perswaded himselfe, that hee would never become a
Christian, after he had once seene the Court of Rome:
neverthelesse, he counted his labour not altogither lost, in regard
he bestowed it to a good end, and honest intentions are to be
commended.
The Jew mounted on horse-backe, and made no lingering in his
journey to Rome; where being arrived, he was very honourably
entertained by other Jewes dwelling in Rome. And during the time
of his abiding there (without revealing to
any one the reason of his comming thither) very heedfully he
observed the maner of the Popes life, of the Cardinals, Prelates,
and all the Courtiers. And being a man very discreet and judicious,
hee apparantly perceived, both by his owne eye, and further
information of friends; that from the highest to the lowest (without
any restraint, remorse of conscience, shame, or feare of
punishment) all sinned in abhominable luxurie, and not naturally
onely, but in foule Sodomie, so that the credite of Strumpets and
Boyes was not small, and yet might be too easily obtayned.
Moreover, drunkards, belly-Gods, and servants of the paunch,
more then of any thing else (even like brutish beasts after their
luxury) were every where to be met withall. And upon further
observation, hee saw all men so covetous and greedie of Coyne,
that every thing was bought and solde for ready money, not onely
the blood of men, but (in plaine termes) the faith of Christians, yea,
and matters of divinest qualities, how, or to whomsoever
appertaining, were it for Sacrifices or Benefices, whereof was made
45
no mean merchandize, and more Brokers were there to be found
(then in Paris attending upon all Trades) of manifest Symonie,
under the nice name of Negotiation, and for gluttony, not
sustentation: even as if God had not knowne the signification of
vocables, nor the intentions of wicked hearts, but would suffer
himselfe to bee deceived by the outward names of things, as
wretched men commonly use to doe.
These things, and many more (fitter for silence, then for
publication) were so deepely displeasing to the Jew, being a most
sober and modest man; that he had soone seene enough, resolving
on his returne to Paris, which very speedily he performed.
And when Jehannot heard of his arrivall, crediting much
rather other newes from him, then ever to see him a converted
Christian; he went to welcome him, and kindly they feasted one
another. After some few dayes of resting, Jehannot demanded of
him; what he thought of our holy Father the Pope and his
Cardinals, and generally of all the other Courtiers? Whereto the
Jew readily answered; It is strange Jehannot, that God should give
them so much as he doth. For I will truely tell thee, that if I had
beene able to consider all those things, which there I have both
heard and seene: I could then have resolved my selfe, never to
have found in any Priest, either sanctity, devotion, good worke,
example of honest life, or any good thing else beside. But if a man
desire to see luxury, avarice, gluttony, and such wicked things,
yea, worse, if worse may be, and held in generall estimation of all
men; let him but goe to Rome, which I thinke rather to be the forge
of damnable actions, then any way leaning to grace or goodnesse.
And, for ought I could perceive, me thinkes your chiefe Pastour,
and (consequently) all the rest of his dependants, doe strive so
much as they may (with all their engine arte and endevour) to
bring to nothing, or else to banish quite out of the world, Christian
Religion, whereof they should be the support and foundation.
But because I perceive, that their wicked intent will never come to
passe, but contrariwise, that your faith enlargeth it selfe, shining
every day much more cleare and splendant: I gather thereby
evidently, that the blessed Spirit is the true ground and defence
thereof, as being more true and holy then any other. In which
respect, whereas I stood stiffe and obstinate against the good
admonitions, and
never minded to become a Christian: now I freely open my heart
unto thee, that nothing in the world can or shall hinder me, but I
will be a Christian, as thou art.
46
Let us therefore presently goe to the Church, and there (according
to the true custome of your holy faiths) helpe me to be baptized.
Jehannot, who expected a farre contrary conclusion then this,
hearing him speake it with such constancy; was the very gladdest
man in the world, and went with him to the Church of Nostre
Dame in Paris, where he requested the Priests there abiding, to
bestow baptisme on Abraham, which they joyfully did, hearing
him so earnestly to desire it. Jehannot was his Godfather, and
named him John, and afterward, by learned Divines he was more
fully instructed in the grounds of our faith; wherein he grew of
great understanding, and led a very vertuous life.
47
THE FIRST DAY, THE THIRD NOVELL
WHEREBY THE AUTHOR, APPROVING THE CHRISTIAN
FAITH, SHEWETH, HOW BENEFICIALL A SODAINE AND
INGENIOUS ANSWERE MAY FALL OUT TO BEE, ESPECIALLY
WHEN A MAN FINDS HIMSELFE IN SOME EVIDENT DANGER
Melchisedech a Jew, by recounting a Tale of three Rings, to the
great Soldan, named Saladine, prevented a great danger which was
prepared for him. Madame Neiphila having ended her Discourse,
which was well allowed of by all the company; it pleased the
Queene, that Madame Philomena should next succeede in order,
who thus began.
The Tale delivered by Neiphila, maketh mee remember a doubtfull
case, which sometime hapned to another Jew. And because that
God, and the truth of his holy Faith, hath bene already very well
discoursed on: it shall not seeme unfitting (in my poore opinion) to
descend now into the accidents of men. Wherefore, I will relate a
matter unto you, which being attentively heard and considered;
may make you much more circumspect, in answering to divers
questions and demands, then (perhaps) otherwise you would be.
Consider then (most woorthy assembly) that like as folly or
dulnesse, many times hath overthrowne some men from place of
eminencie, into most great and greevous miseries: even so, discreet
sense and good understanding, hath delivered many out of
irksome perils, and
seated them in safest security. And to prove it true, that folly hath
made many fall from high authority, into poore and despised
calamity; may be avouched by infinite examples, which now were
needelesse to remember: But, that good sense and able
understanding, may proove to be the occasion of great desolation,
without happy prevention, I will declare unto you in very few
words, and make it good according to my promise.
Saladine, was a man so powerfull and valiant, as not onely his very
valour made him Soldan of Babylon, and also gave him many
signall victories, over Kings of the Sarrazens, and of Christians
likewise. Having in divers Warres, and other magnificent
employments, of his owne, wasted all his treasure, and (by reason
of some sodaine accident happening to him) standing in neede to
use some great summe of money, yet not readily knowing where,
or how to procure it; he remembred a rich Jew named
Melchisedech, that lent out money to use or interest in the City of
48
Alexandria. This man he imagined best able to furnish him, if he
could be won to do it willingly: but he was knowne to be so
gripple and miserable, that hardly any meanes would drawe him
to it. In the end, constrained by necessity, and labouring his wits
for some apt device whereby he might have it: he concluded,
though hee might not compell him to do it, yet by a practise
shadowed with good reason to ensnare him. And having sent for
him, entertained him very familiarly in his Court, and sitting
downe by him, thus began.
Honest man, I have often heard it reported by many, that thou art
very skilfull, and in cases concerning God, thou goest beyond all
other of these times: wherefore,
I would gladly bee informed by thee, which of those three
Lawes or Religions, thou takest to be truest; that of the Jew, the
other of the Sarazen, or that of the Christian? The Jew, being a very
wise man, plainely perceived, that Saladine sought to entrap him
in his answere, and so to raise some quarrell against him.
For, if he commended any one of those Lawes above the other, he
knew that Saladine had what he aymed at. Wherefore, bethinking
himselfe to shape such an answere, as might no way trouble or
entangle him: summoning all his sences together, and considering,
that dallying with the Soldane might redound to his no meane
danger, thus he replied.
My Lord, the question propounded by you, is faire and worthy,
and to answere my opinion truely thereof, doth necessarily require
some time of consideration, if it might stand with your liking to
allow it: but if not, let me first make entrance to my reply, with a
pretty tale, and well worth the hearing. I have oftentimes heard it
reported, that (long since) there was a very wealthy man, who
(among other precious Jewels of his owne) had a goodly Ring of
great valew; the beauty and estimation whereof, made him
earnestly desirous to leave it as a perpetuall memory and honour
to his successors. Whereupon, he willed and ordained, that he
among his male children, with whom this Ring (being left by the
Father) should be found in custody after his death; hee and none
other, was to bee reputed his heire, and to be honoured and
reverenced by all the rest, as being the prime and worthiest person.
That Sonne, to whom this Ring was left by him, kept the same
course to his posterity, dealing (in all respects) as his predecessor
had
done; so that (in short time) the Ring (from hand to hand) had
many owners by Legacie.
49
At length, came to the hand of one, who had three sonnes, all of
them goodly and vertuous persons, and verie obedient to their
Father: in which regard, he affected them all equally, without any
difference or partiall respect. The custome of this Ring being
knowne to them, each one of them (coveting to beare esteeme
above the other) desired (as hee could best make his meanes) his
Father, that in regard he was now growne very old, he would leave
that Ring to him, whereby he should bee acknowledged for his
heire. The good man, who loved no one of them more then the
other, knew not how to make his choise, nor to which of them he
should leave the Ring: yet having past his promise to them
severally, he studied by what meanes to satisfie them all three.
Wherefore, secretly having conferred with a curious and excellent
Goldsmith, hee caused two other Rings to bee made, so really
resembling the first made Ring, that himselfe (when he had them
in his hand) could not distinguish which was the right one.
Lying upon his death-bed, and his Sonnes then plying him by their
best opportunities, he gave to each of them a Ring. And they (after
his death) presuming severally upon their right to the inheritance
and honor, grew to great contradiction and square: each man
producing then his Ring, which were so truely all alike in
resemblance, as no one could know the right Ring from the other.
And therefore, suite in Law, to distinguish the true heire to his
Father, continued long time, and so it dooth yet to this very day. In
like manner my good Lord, concerning those
three Lawes given by God the Father, to three such people as you
have propounded: each of them do imagine that they have the
heritage of God, and his true Law, and also duely to performe his
Commandements; but which of them do so indeede, the question
(as of the three Rings) is yet remaining.
Saladine well perceyving, that the Jew was too cunning to bee
caught in his snare, and had answered so well, that to doe him
further violence, would redound unto his perpetuall dishonour;
resolved to reveale his neede and extremity, and try if hee would
therein friendly sted him. Having disclosed the matter, and how he
purposed to have dealt with him, if he had not returned so wise an
answere; the Jew lent him so great a sum of money as hee
demanded, and Saladine repayed it againe to him justly, giving
him other great gifts beside: respecting him as his especiall friend,
and maintaining him in very honourable condition, neere unto his
owne person.
50
THE FIRST DAY, THE FOURTH NOVELL
WHEREIN MAY BEE NOTED, THAT SUCH MEN AS WILL
REPROVE THOSE ERROURS IN OTHERS, WHICH REMAINE IN
THEMSELVES, COMMONLY ARE THE AUTHORS OF THEIR
OWNE REPREHENSION A Monke having committed an offence,
deserving to be very greevously punished, freed himselfe from the
paine to be inflicted on him, by wittily reprehending his Abbot,
with the very same fault. So ceased Madame Philotnena, after the
conclusion of her Tale: when Dioneus sitting next unto her,
(without tarrying for any other command from the Queene,
knowing by the order formerly begun, that hee was to follow in the
same course) spake in this manner.
Gracious Ladies, if I faile not in understanding your generall
intention, we are purposely assembled heere to tell Tales; and
especially such as may please our selves. In which respect, because
nothing shold be done disorderly, I hold it lawfull for every one (as
our Queene decreed before her Dignity) to relate such a Noveltie,
as in their owne judgement may cause most contentment.
Wherefore having heard that by the good admonitions of Jehannot
de Chevigny, Abraham the Jew was advised to the salvation of his
soule, and Melchisedech (by his witty understanding) defended his
riches from the traines of Saladine: I now purpose to tell you in a
few plaine words, without feare of receiving any reprehension,
how
cunningly a Monke compassed his deliverance, from a punishment
intended towards him.
There was in the Country of Lunigiana (which is not far distant
from our owne) a Monastery, which sometime was better furnished
with holinesse and Religion, then now adayes they are: wherein
lived (among divers other) a yong Novice Monke, whose hot and
lusty disposition (being in the vigour of his yeeres) was such, as
neither Fasts nor prayers had any great power over him. It chanced
on a fasting day about high noon, when all the other Monkes were
asleep in their Dormitaries or Dorters, this frolicke Friar was
walking alone in their Church, which stoode in a very solitarie
place, where ruminating on many matters by himselfe, hee espyed
a prettie handsome Wench (some Husbandmans daughter in the
Countrey, that had beene gathering rootes and hearbes in the field)
upon her knees before in Altar; whom he had no sooner seene, but
51
immediately hee felt effeminate temptations, and such as ill fitted
with his profession.
Lascivious desire, and no religious devotion, made him draw neere
her, and whether under shrift (the onely cloake to compasse carnal
affections) or some other as close conference to as pernitious and
vile a purpose, I know not: but so farre he prevailed upon her
frailety, and such a bargaine passed betweene them, that from the
Church, he wonne her to his Chamber, before any person could
perceive it. Now, while this yong lusty Monke (transported with
overfond affection) was more carelesse of his dalliance, then he
should have bene: the Lord Abbot being newly arisen from sleepe,
and walking softly about the Cloyster, came to the
Monkes Dorter doore, where hearing what noyse was made
betweene them, and a feminine voyce more strange then hee was
wont to heare; he layed his eare close to the Chamber doore, and
plainly perceived, that a woman was within. Wherewith being
much moved, he intended sodainly to make him open the doore;
but (upon better consideration) hee conceyved it farre more fitting
for him, to returne backe to his owne Chamber, and tarry till the
Monke should come forth.
The Monke, though his delight with the Damosell was
extraordinary, yet feare and suspition followed upon it; for, in the
very height of all his wantonnesse, he heard a soft treading about
the doore. And prying thorow a small crevice in the same dore,
perceived apparantly, that the Abbot himselfe stood listening there,
and could not be ignorant but that the Maide was with him in the
Chamber. As after pleasure ensueth paine, for the veniall Monke
knew well enough (though wanton heate would not let him heede
it before) that most greevous punishment must bee inflicted on
him, which made him sad beyond all measure: Neverthelesse,
without disclosing his dismay to the yong Maiden, he began to
consider with himselfe on many meanes, whereby to find out one
that might best fit his turne. And suddenly conceited an apt
stratagem, which sorted to such effect as he would have it:
whereupon, seeming satisfied for that season, he tolde the
Damosell, that (being carefull of her credit) as hee had brought her
in unseene of any, so he would free her from thence againe,
desiring her to tarrie there (without making any noyse at all) untill
such time as he returned to her.
Going forth of the chamber, and locking it fast with the key, he
went directly to the Lord Abbots lodging, and delivering him the
saide key (as every Monke used to doe the like, when he went
52
abroade out of the Convent) setting a good countenance on the
matter, boldly saide; My Lord, I have not yet brought in all my part
of the wood, which lieth ready cut downe in the Forrest; and
having now convenient time to doe it, if you please to give me
leave, I will goe and fetch it.
The Abbot perswading himselfe, that he had not beene discovered
by the Monke, and to be resolved more assuredly in the offence
committed; being not a little jocund of so happy an accident, gladly
tooke the key, and gave him leave to fetch the wood.
No sooner was he gone, but the Abbot beganne to consider with
himselfe, what he were best to doe in this case, either (in the
presence of all the other Monkes) to open the Chamber doore, that
so the offence being knowne to them all, they might have no
occasion of murmuring against him, when he proceeded in the
Monkes punishment; or rather should first understand of the
Damosell her selfe, how, and in what manner shee was brought
thither. Furthermore, he considered, that shee might be a woman
of respect, or some such mans daughter, as would not take it well,
to have her disgraced before all the Monkes. Wherefore hee
concluded, first to see (himselfe) what shee was, and then
(afterward) to resolve upon the rest. So going very softly to the
Chamber, and entring in, locked the doore fast with the key, when
the poore Damosell thinking it had beene the gallant young
Monke; but finding it to be the Lord Abbot, shee fell on her knees
weeping, as fearing now to receive publike shame, by being
betrayed in this unkinde manner.
My Lord Abbot looking demurely on the Maide, and perceiving
her to be faire, feate, and lovely; felt immediately (although he was
olde) no lesse spurring on to fleshly desires, then the young Monke
before had done; whereupon he beganne to conferre thus privately
with himselfe. Why should I not take pleasure, when I may freely
have it? Cares and molestations I endure every day, but sildome
find such delights prepared for me. This is a delicate sweete young
Damosell, and here is no eye that can discover me. If I can enduce
her to doe as I would have her, I know no reason why I should
gaine-say it. No man can know it, or any tongue blaze it abroade;
and sinne so concealed, is halfe pardoned. Such a faire fortune as
this is, perhaps hereafter will never befall me; and therefore I hold
it wisedome, to take such a benefit when a man may enjoy it.
Upon this immodest meditation, and his purpose quite altered
which he came for; he went neerer to her, and very kindly began to
comfort her, desiring her to forbeare weeping: and (by further
53
insinuating speeches) acquainted her with his amorous intention.
The Maide, who was made neither of yron nor diamond, and
seeking to prevent one shame by another, was easily wonne to the
Abbots will, which caused him to embrace and kisse her often.
Our lusty young novice Monke, whom the Abbot imagined to bee
gone for wood, had hid himselfe aloft upon the roofe of the Dorter,
where, when he saw the Abbot enter alone into the Chamber, he
lost a great part of his former feare,
promising to himselfe a kinde of perswasion, that somewhat would
ensue to his better comfort; but when he beheld him lockt into the
Chamber, then his hope grew to undoubted certainty. A little
chincke or crevice favoured him, whereat he could both heare and
see, whatsoever was done or spoken by them: so, when the Abbot
thought hee had staide long enough with the Damosell, leaving her
still there, and locking the doore fast againe, hee returned thence to
his owne Chamber.
Within some short while after, the Abbot knowing the Monke to be
in the Convent, and supposing him to be lately returned with the
wood, determined to reprove him sharpely, and to have him
closely imprisoned, that the Damosell might remaine solie to
himselfe. And causing him to be called presently before him, with
a very stearne and angry countenance, giving him many harsh and
bitter speeches, commanded, that he should be clapt in prison.
The Monke very readily answered, saying. My good Lord, I have
not yet beene so long in the Order of Saint Benedict, as to learne all
the particularities thereto belonging. And beside Sir, you never
shewed mee or any of my Brethren, in what manner we young
Monkes ought to use women, as you have otherwise done for our
custome of prayer and fasting. But seeing you have so lately
therein instructed mee, and by your owne example how to doe it: I
heere solemnely promise you, if you please to pardon me but this
one error, I will never faile therein againe, but dayly follow what I
have seene you doe.
The Abbot, being a man of quicke apprehension, perceived
instantly by this answere; that the Monke not onely knew as much
as he did, but also had seene
(what was intended) that hee should not. Wherefore, finding
himselfe to be as faulty as the Monke, and that hee could not
shame him, but worthily had deserved as much himselfe;
pardoning him, and imposing silence on eithers offence: they
54
convayed the poore abused Damosell forth of their doores, she
purposing (never after) to transgresse in the like manner
55
THE FIRST DAY, THE FIFT NOVELL
DECLARING, THAT WISE AND VERTUOUS LADIES, OUGHT
TO HOLD THEIR CHASTITIE IN MORE ESTEEME, THEN THE
GREATNESSE AND TREASURES OF PRINCES: AND THAT A
DISCREETE LORD SHOULD NOT OFFER MODESTIE
VIOLENCE The Lady Marquesse of Montferrat, with a Banquet of
Hennes, and divers other gracious speeches beside, repressed the
fond love of the King of France. The Tale reported by Dioneus, at
the first hearing of the Ladies, began to rellish of some immodestie,
as the bashfull blood mounting up into their faces, delivered by
apparant testimonie. And beholding one another with scarsepleasing
lookes, during all the time it was in discoursing, no sooner
had he concluded: but with a few milde and gentle speeches, they
gave him a modest reprehension, and meaning to let him know
that such tales ought not to be tolde among women. Afterward, the
Queene commaunded Madam Fiammetta, (sitting on a banke of
flowers before her) to take her turne as next in order; and she,
smiling with such a virgin blush, as very beautifully became her,
began in this manner.
It is no little joy to mee, that we understand so well (by the
discourses already past) what power consisteth in the delivery of
wise and readie answeres; And because it is a great part of sence
and judgement in men, to affect women of greater birth and
quality then themselves, as also an admirable fore-sight in women,
to
keepe off from being surprized in love, by Lords going beyond
them in degree: a matter offereth it selfe to my memory, well
deserving my speech and your attention, how a Gentlewoman
(both in word and deede) should defend her honor in that kind,
when importunity laboureth to betray it.
The Marquesse of Montferrat was a worthy and valiant Knight,
who being Captaine Generall for the Church, the necessary service
required his company on the Seas, in a goodly Army of the
Christians against the Turkes. Upon a day, in the Court of King
Philip, sirnamed the one eyed King (who likewise made
preparation in France, for a royall assistance to that expedition) as
many speeches were delivered, concerning the valour and
manhoode of this Marquesse: it fortuned, that a Knight was then
present, who knew him very familiarly, and he gave an addition to
the former commendation, that the whole world contained not a
56
more equall couple in marriage, then the Marquesse and his Lady.
For, as among all knights, the Marquesse could hardly be paraleld
for Armes and Honour; even so his wife, in comparison of all other
Ladies, was scarcely matchable for beauty and vertue. Which
words were so weighty in the apprehension of King Philip, that
sodainly (having as yet never seen her) he began to affect her very
earnestly, concluding to embarke himselfe at Gennes or Genoua,
there to set forward on the intended voyage, and journying thither
by land, hee would shape some honest excuse to see the Lady
Marquesse, whose Lord being then from home, opinion perswaded
him over fondly, that he should easily obtaine the issue of his
amorous desire.
When hee was come within a dayes journey, where the Ladie
Marquesse then lay; he sent her word that she should expect his
company on the morrow at dinner. The Lady, being singularly
wise and judicious, answered the Messenger, that she reputed the
Kings comming to her, as an extraordinary grace and favour, and
that he should bee most heartily welcome. Afterward, entring into
further consideration with her selfe, what the King might meane by
his private visitation, knowing her Husband to be from home, and
it to bee no meane barre to his apter entertainement: at last she
discreetly conceited (and therin was not deceived) that babling
report of her beauty and perfections, might thus occasion the Kings
comming thither, his journey lying else a quite contrary way.
Notwithstanding, being a Princely Lady, and so loyal a wife as
ever lived shee intended to give him her best entertainement:
summoning the chiefest Gentlemen in the Country together, to take
due order (by their advice) for giving the King a gracious
Welcome. But concerning the dinner, and diet for service to his
Table, that remained onely at her own disposing.
Sending presently abroad, and buying all the Hennes that the
Country affoorded, shee commaunded her Cookes, that onely of
them (without any other provision beside) they should prepare all
the services that they could devise. On the morrow, the King came
according to his promise, and was most honourably welcomed by
the Lady, who seemed in his eye (far beyond the Knights speeches
of her) the fairest creature that ever he had seene before; whereat
he mervailed not a little, extolling her perfections to be peerelesse,
which much the more enflamed
his affections, and (almost) made his desires impatient. The
King beeing withdrawne into such Chambers, as orderly were
prepared for him, and as beseemed so great a Prince: the houre of
dinner drawing on, the King and the Lady Marquesse were seated
57
at one Table, and his attendants placed at other tables, answerable
to their degrees of honour.
Plenty of dishes being served in, and the rarest Wines that the
Countrey yeelded, the King had more minde to the faire Lady
Marques, then any meate that stood on the Table. Neverthelesse,
observing each service after other, and that all the Viands (though
variously cooked, and in divers kindes) were nothing else but
Hennes onely, he began to wonder; and so much the rather,
because he knew the Country to be of such quality, that it afforded
all plenty both of Fowles and Venison: beside, after the time of his
comming was heard, they had respite enough, both for hawking
and hunting; and therefore it encreased his marvell the more, that
nothing was provided for him, but Hennes onely: wherein to be
the better resolved, turning a merry countenance to the Lady, thus
he spake. Madam, are Hennes onely bred in this Country, and no
Cockes? The Lady Marquesse, very well understanding his
demand, which fitted her with an apt opportunity, to thwart his
idle hope, and defend her owne honour; boldly returned the King
this answere.
Not so my Lord, but women and wives, howsoever they differ in
garments and graces one from another; yet notwithstanding, they
are all heere as they bee in other places.
When the King heard this reply, he knew well enough the occasion
of his Henne dinner, as also, what vertue lay couched under her
answere; perceiving apparantly, that wanton words would prove
but in vaine, and such a woman was not easily to be seduced;
wherefore, as hee grew enamored on her inconsiderately, so he
found it best fitting for his honour, to quench this heate with
wisedome discreetly. And so, without any more words, or further
hope of speeding in so unkingly a purpose, dinner being ended, by
a sudden departing, he smoothly shadowed the cause of his
comming, and thanking her for the honour shee had done him,
commended her to her chaste disposition, and posted away with
speede to Gennes.
58
THE FIRST DAY, THE SIXT NOVELL
DECLARING, THAT IN FEW, DISCREETE, AND WELL PLACED
WORDS, THE COVERED CRAFT OF CHURCH-MEN MAY BEE
JUSTLY REPROVED, AND THEIR HYPOCRISIE HONESTLY
DISCOVERED An honest plaine meaning man, (simply and
conscionably) reprehended the malignity, hypocrisie, and
misdemeanour of many Religious persons.
Madam Aemilia sitting next to the gentle Lady Fiammetta,
perceiving the modest chastisement, which the vertuous Lady
Marquesse had given to the King of France, was generally graced
by the whole Assembly; began (after the Queene had thereto
appointed her) in these words. Nor will I conceale the deserved
reprehension, which an honest simple lay-man, gave to a covetous
holy Father, in very few words; yet more to be commended, then
derided.
Not long since (worthy Ladies) there dwelt in our owne native
City, a Friar Minor, an Inquisitor after matters of Faith; who,
although he laboured greatly to seeme a sanctified man, and an
earnest affecter of Christian Religion, (as all of them appeare to be
in outward shew;) yet he was a much better Inquisitor after them
that had their purses plenteously stored with money, then of such
as were slenderly grounded in Faith. By which diligent continued
care in him, he found out a man, more rich in purse, then
understanding; and yet not so defective in matters of faith, as
misguided by his owne simple speaking, and (perhaps) when his
braine was well warmed with wine, words fell more foolishly from
him, then in better judgement they could have done.
Being on a day in company, (very little differing in quality from
him selfe) he chanced to say; that he had beene at such good wine,
as God himselfe did never drinke better. Which words (by some
Sicophant then in presence) being carried to this curious Inquisitor,
and he well knowing, that the mans faculties were great, and his
bagges swolne up full with no meane abundance: Cum gladijs et
fustibus; With Booke, Bell, and Candle, he raysed an hoast of
execrations against him, and the Sumner cited him with a solemne
Processe to appeare before him, understanding sufficiently, that
this course would sooner fetch money from him, then amend any
misbeliefe in the man; for no further reformation did he seeke after.
59
The man comming before him, hee demanded, if the accusation
intimated against him, was true or no? Whereto the honest man
answered, that he could not denie the speaking of such words, and
declared in what manner they were uttered.
Presently the Inquisitor, most devoutly addicted to Saint John with
the golden beard, saide; What? Doest thou make our Lord a
drinker, and a curious quaffer of wines, as if he were a glutton, a
belly-god, or a Taverne haunter, as thou, and other drunkards are.
Being an hypocrite, as thou art, thou thinkest this to be but a light
matter, because it may seeme so in thine owne opinion: but I tell
thee plainely, that it deserveth fire and faggot, if I should proceede
in justice to inflict it on thee: with these, and other such like
threatning words, as also a very stearne and angry countenance, he
made the man beleeve himselfe to be an Epicure, and
that hee denied the eternity of the soule; whereby he fell into such
a trembling feare, as doubting indeede, least he should be burned;
that, to be more mercifully dealt withal, he rounded him in the
eare, and by secret meanes, so annointed his hands with Saint
Johns golden grease (a verie singular remedie against the Disease
Pestilentiall in covetous Priests, especially Friars Minors, that dare
touch no money) as the case became very quickly altered.
This soveraigne Unction was of such vertue (though Galen speakes
not a word thereof among all his cheefest Medicines) and so farre
prevailed, that the terrible threatning words of fire and faggot,
became meerly frozen up, and gracious language blew a more
gentle and calmer ayre; the Inquisitor delivering him an hallowed
Crucifixe, creating him a Soldier of the Crosse (because he had
payed Crosses good store for it,) and even as if he were to travell
under that Standard to the holy Land; so did hee appoint him a
home-paying pennance, namely, to visit him thrice every weeke in
his Chamber, and to annoint his hands with the selfesame yellow
unguent, and afterward, to heare Masse of the holy Crosse, visiting
him also at dinner time, which being ended, to do nothing all the
rest of the day, but according as he directed him.
The simple man, yet not so simple, but seeing that this weekely
greazing the Inquisitors hands, would in time graspe away all his
gold, grew weary of this annointing, and began to consider with
himselfe, how to stay the course of this chargeable penance. And
comming one morning (according to his injunction) to heare Masse,
in the Gospell he observed these words; You shall receive an hundred
for one, and so possesse eternall life; which saying, he kept
perfectly in his memory: and as he was commanded, at dinner
60
time, he came to the Inquisitor, finding him (among his fellowes)
seated at the Table. The Inquisitor presently demaunded of him,
whether he had heard Masse that morning, or no? Yes Sir, replyed
the man very readily. Hast thou heard any thing therein (quoth the
Inquisitor) whereof thou art doubtfull, or desirst to be further
informed? Surely Sir, answered the plaine-meaning man, I make
no doubt of any thing I have heard, but do beleeve all constantly:
onely one thing troubleth me much, and maketh me very
compassionate of you, and of all these holy Fathers your brethren,
perceiving in what wofull and wretched estate you will be, when
you shall come into another world. What words are these, quoth
the Inquisitor? And why art thou moved to such compassion of us?
O good Sir, saide the man, do you remember the wordes in the
Gospell this morning, You shall receive an hundred for one? That
is verie true replyed the Inquisitor, but what mooveth thee to urge
those words? I will tell you Sir, answered the plain fellow, so it
might please you not to be offended. Since the time of my resorting
hither, I have daily seene many poore people at your doore, and
(out of your abundance) when you and your Brethren have fed
sufficiently, every one hath had a good messe of Pottage: now Sir,
if for every dishfull given, you are sure to receive an hundred
againe, you will all be meerely drowned in pottage. Although the
rest (sitting at the Table with the Inquisitor) laughed heartily at this
jest; yet he found himselfe toucht in another nature, having
hypocritically received for one poore offence, above three hundred
peeces of Gold, and not a mite to be restored againe. But fearing to
be further disclosed, yet threatning him with another Processe in
law, for abusing the words of the Gospel, he was content to
dismisse him for altogither, without any more golden greasing in
the hand.
61
THE FIRST DAY, THE SEVENTH NOVELL
APPROVING, THAT IT IS MUCH UNFITTING FOR A PRINCE,
OR GREAT PERSON, TO BEE COVETOUS; BUT RATHER TO BE
LIBERALL TO ALL MEN Bergamino, by telling a tale of a skilfull
man, named Primasso, and of an Abbot of Clugni; honestly
checked a new kinde of Covetousnesse, in Mayster Can de la Scala.
The courteous demeanor of Madam Aemilia, and the quaintnesse
of her discourse, caused both the Queene, and the rest of the
company, to commend the invention of carrying the Crosse, and
the golden oyntment appointed for pennance.
Afterward, Philostratus, who was in order to speake next, began in
this manner.
It is a commendable thing (faire Ladies) to hit a But that never
stirreth out of his place: but it is a matter much more admirable, to
see a thing suddainely appearing, and sildome or never frequented
before, to bee as suddenly hit by an ordinary Archer. The vicious
and polluted lives of Priests, yeeldeth matter of it selfe in many
things, deserving speech and reprehension, as a true But of
wickednes, and well worthy to be sharply shot at. And therefore,
though that honest meaning man did wisely, in touching Master
Inquisitor to the quicke, with the hypocriticall charity of Monkes
and Friars, in giving such things to the poore, as were more meete
for Swine, or to be worse throwne away, yet I hold him more to be
commended,
who (by occasion of a former tale, and which I purpose to
relate) pleasantly reprooved Master Can de la Scala, a Magnifico
and mighty Lord, for a sudden and unaccustomed covetousnesse
appearing in him, figuring by other men, that which hee intended
to say of him, in manner following.
Master Can de la Scala, as fame ranne abroad of him in all places,
was (beyond the infinite favours of Fortune towards him) one of
the most notable and magnificent Lords that ever lived in Italy,
since the daies of Fredericke the second, Emperor. He determining
to procure a very solemne assembly at Verona, and many people
being met there from divers places, especially Gentlemen of all
degrees; suddenly (upon what occasion I know not) his minde
altred, and hee would not goe forward with his intention. Most of
them he partly recompenced which were come thither, and they
dismissed to depart at their pleasure, one onely man remained
62
unrespected, or in any kinde sort sent away, whose name was
Bergamino, a man very pleasantly disposed, and so wittily readie
in speaking and answering, as none could easily credit it, but such
as heard him; and although his recompence seemed over-long
delayed, yet hee made no doubt of a beneficiall ending.
By some enemies of his, Master Can de la Scala was incensed, that
whatsoever he gave or bestowed on him, was as ill imployed and
utterly lost, as if it were throwne into the fire, and therefore he
neither did or spake any thing to him.
Some few dayes being passed over, and Bergamino perceiving, that
hee was neither called, nor any account made of, notwithstanding
many manly good parts in
him; observing beside, that hee found a shrewd consumption in his
purse, his Inne, horses, and servants, being chargeable to him, he
began to grow extremely melancholly, and yet hee attended in
expectation day by day, as thinking it farre unfitting for him, to
depart before he was bidden farewell.
Having brought with him thither three goodly rich garments,
which had beene given him by sundrie Lords, for his more sightly
appearance at this great meeting; the importunate Host being
greedie of payment, first he delivered him one of them, and yet not
halfe the score being wiped off, the second must needes follow;
and beside, except he meant to leave his lodging, hee must live
upon the third so long as it would last, till hee saw what end his
hopes would sort too. It fortuned, during the time of living thus
upon his last refuge, that hee met with Maister Can one day at
dinner, where he presented himselfe before him, with a
discontented countenance: which Maister Can well observing,
more to distaste him, then take delight in any thing that could
come from him, he sayd. Bergamino, how cheerest thou? Thou art
very melancholly, I prythee tell us why? Bergamino suddenly,
without any premeditation, yet seeming as if he had long
considered thereon, reported this Tale.
Sir, I have heard of a certaine man, named Primasso, one skilfully
learned in the Grammar, and (beyond all other) a very witty and
ready versifier: in regard whereof, he was so much admired, and
farre renowned, that such as never saw him, but onely heard of
him, could easily say, this is Primasso. It came to passe, that being
once at Paris, in poore estate, as commonly he could light on no
better
63
fortune (because vertue is slenderly rewarded, by such as have the
greatest possessions) he heard much fame of the Abbot of Clugni, a
man reputed (next to the Pope) to be the richest Prelate of the
Church. Of him he heard wonderfull and magnificent matters, that
he alwayes kept an open and hospitable Court, and never made
refusall of any (from whence soever hee came or went) but they
did eate and drinke freely there; provided, that they came when
the Abbot was set at the Table. Primasso hearing this, and being an
earnest desirer to see magnificent and vertuous men, hee resolved
to goe see this rare bounty of the Abbot, demanding how far he
dwelt from Paris? Being answered, about some three Leagues
thence. Primasso made account, that if he went on betimes in the
morning, he should easily reach thither before the houre for
dinner.
Being instructed in the way, and not finding any to walke along
with him; fearing, if he went without some furnishment, and
should stay long there for his dinner, he might (perhaps)
complaine of hunger: he therefore carried three loaves of bread
with him, knowing that he could meet with water every where,
albeit he used to drinke but little. Having aptly conveyed his bread
about him, he went on his journy, and arrived at the Lord Abbots
Court, an indifferent while before dinner time: wherefore entering
into the great Hall, and so from place to place, beholding the great
multitude of Tables, bountifull preparation in the Kitchin, and
what admirable provision there was for dinner, he said to himselfe;
Truly this man is more magnificent then fame hath made him,
because shee speakes too sparingly of him.
While thus he went about, considering on all these things very
respectively, he saw the Maister of the Abbots Houshold (because
then it was the houre of dinner) command water to be brought for
washing hands, so everie one sitting down at the Tatle, it fell to the
lot of Primasso, to sit directly against the doore, whereat the Abbot
must enter into the Hall. The custome in this Court was such, that
no manner of Foode should be served to any of the Table, untill
such time as the Lord Abbot was himselfe set: whereupon, every
thing being fit and ready, the Master of the Houshold went to tell
his Lord, that nothing now wanted but his onely presence.
The Abbot comming from his Chamber to enter the Hall, looking
about him, as hee was wont to doe; the first man hee saw was
Primasso, who being but in homely habite, and he having not
seene him before to his remembrance, a present bad conceite
possessed his braine, that he never saw an unworthier person,
saying within himselfe: See how I give my goods away to bee
64
devoured. So returning backe to his Chamber againe;
commaunded the doore to be made fast, demaunding of every man
neere about him, if they knew the base Knave that sate before his
entrance into the Hall, and all his servants answered no. Primasso
being extreamely hungry, with travailing on foote so farre, and
never used to fast so long; expecting still when meate would be
served in, and that the Abbot came not at all:
drew out one of his loaves which hee brought with him, and very
heartily fell to feeding.
My Lord Abbot, after hee had stayed within an indifferent while,
sent forth one of his men, to see if the poore fellow was gone, or no.
The servant told him, that he stayed there, and fed upon dry bread,
which it seemed he had brought thither with him. Let him feede on
his owne (replyed the Abbot) for he shall taste of none of mine this
day. Gladly wold the Abbot, that Primasso should have gone
thence of himselfe, and yet held it scarsely honest in his Lordship,
to dismisse him by his owne command. Primasso having eaten one
of his Loaves, and yet the Abbot was not come; began to feede
upon the second: the Abbot still sending to expect his absence, and
answered as he was before. At length, the Abbot not comming, and
Primasso having eaten up his second loafe, hunger compeld him to
begin with the third.
When these newes were carried to the Abbot, sodainly he brake
forth and saide. What new kinde of needy tricke hath my braine
begotte this day? Why do I grow disdainfull against any man
whatsoever? I have long time allowed my meate to be eaten by all
commers that did please to visit me, without exception against any
person, Gentleman, Yeoman, poore or rich, Marchant or Minstrill,
honest man or knave, never refraining my presence in the Hall, by
basely contemning one poore man. Beleeve me, covetousnesse of
one mans meate, doth ill agree with mine estate and calling. What
though he appeareth a wretched fellow to me? He may be of
greater merit then I can imagine, and deserve more honor then I
am able to give him.
Having thus discoursed with himselfe, he would needs understand
of whence, and what he was, and finding him to be Primasso, come
onely to see the magnificence which he had reported of him,
knowing also (by the generall fame noysed every where of him)
that he was reputed to be a learned, honest, and ingenious man: he
grew greatly ashamed of his owne folly, and being desirous to
make him an amends, strove many waies how to do him honor.
When dinner was ended, the Abbot bestowed honorable garments
65
on him, such as beseemed his degree and merit, and putting good
store of money in his purse, as also giving him a good horse to ride
on, left it at his owne free election, whether he would stay there
still with him, or depart at his pleasure. Wherewith Primasso being
highly contented, yeelding him the heartiest thankes he could
devise to do, returned to Paris on horse-backe, albeit he came
poorely thether on foot.
Master Can de la Scala, who was a man of good understanding,
perceived immediately (without any further interpretation) what
Bergamino meant by this morall, and smiling on him, saide:
Bergamino, thou hast honestly expressed thy vertue and
necessities, and justly reprooved mine avarice, niggardnesse, and
base folly. And trust me Bergamino, I never felt such a fit of
covetousnesse come upon me, as this which I have dishonestly
declared to thee: and which I will now banish from me, with the
same correction as thou hast taught mee. So, having payed the Host
all his charges, redeeming also his robes or garments, mounting
him on a good Gelding, and putting plenty of Crownes in his
purse, he referd it to his owne choise to depart, or dwell there still
with him.
66
THE FIRST DAY, THE EIGHT NOVELL
WHICH PLAINLY DECLARETH, THAT A COVETOUS
GENTLEMAN, IS NOT WORTHY OF ANY HONOR OR RESPECT
Guillaume Boursier, with a few quaint and familiar words, checkt
the miserable covetousnesse of Signior Herminio de Grimaldi.
Madam Lauretta, sitting next to Philostratus, when she had heard
the witty conceite of Bergamino; knowing, that she was to say
somewhat, without injunction or command, pleasantly thus began.
This last discourse (faire and vertuous company) induceth me to
tell you, how an honest Courtier reprehended in like manner (and
nothing unprofitably) base covetousnesse in a Merchant of
extraordinary wealth. Which Tale, although (in effect) it may
seeme to resemble the former; yet perhaps, it will prove no lesse
pleasing to you, in regard it sorted to as good an end.
It is no long time since, that there lived in Genes or Geneway, a
Gentleman named Signior Herminio de Grimaldo, who (as every
one wel knew) was more rich in inheritances, and ready summes of
currant money then any other knowne Citizen in Italy. And as hee
surpassed other men in wealth, so did he likewise excell them in
wretched Avarice, being so miserably greedy and covetous, as no
man in the world could be more wicked that way; because, not
onely he kept his purse lockt up from pleasuring any, but denied
needfull things to himselfe, enduring
many miseries onely to avoid expences, contrary to the
Genewayes generall custom, who alwayes delighted to be decently
cloathed, and to have their dyet of the best. By reason of which
most miserable basenesse, they tooke away from him the Sirname
of Grimaldi, whereof he was in right descended, and called him
master Herminio the covetous Mizer, a nickname very notably
agreeing with his gripple nature.
It came to passe, that in this time of his spending nothing, but
multiplying daily by infinite meanes, that a civill honest
Gentleman (a Courtier of ready wit, and discoursive in Languages)
came to Geneway, being named Guillaume Boursier. A man very
farre differing from divers Courtiers in these dayes, who for
soothing shamefull and gracelesse maners in such as allow them
maintenance, are called and reputed to bee Gentlemen, yea speciall
favourites: whereas much more worthily, they should be accounted
as knaves and villaines, being borne and bred in all filthinesse, and
67
skilfull in every kinde of basest behaviour, not fit to come in
Princes Courts. For, whereas in passed times, they spent their
dayes and paines in making peace, when Gentlemen were at warre
or dissention, or treating on honest marriages, betweene friends
and familiars, and (with loving speeches) would recreate disturbed
mindes, desiring none but commendable exercises in Court, and
sharpely reprooving (like Fathers) disordred life, or ill actions in
any, albeit with recompence little, or none at all; these upstarts now
adayes, employ all their paines in detractions, sowing questions
and quarrels betweene one another, making no spare of lyes and
falshoods. Nay which is worse, they wil do this in the
presence of any man, upbraiding him with injuries, shames, and
scandals (true or not true) upon the very least occasion. And by
false and deceitful flatteries and villanies of their owne inventing,
they make Gentlemen to become as vile as themselves. For which
detestable qualities, they are better beloved and respected of their
misdemeanored Lords, and recompenced in more bountifull
maner, then men of vertuous carriage and desert. Which is an
argument sufficient, that goodnesse is gone up to heaven, and hath
quite forsaken these loathed lower Regions, where men are
drowned in the mud of all abhominable vices.
But returning where I left (being led out of my way by a just and
religious anger against such deformity) this Gentleman, Master
Guillaume Boursier, was willingly seene, and gladly welcommed
by all the best men in Geneway. Having remained some few daies
in the City, and amongst other matters, heard much talke of the
miserable covetousnesse of master Herminio, he grew very
desirous to have a sight of him. Master Herminio had already
understood, that this Gentleman, Master Guillaume Boursier was
vertuously disposed, and (how covetously soever hee was inclined)
having in him some sparkes of noble nature, gave him very good
words, and gracious entertainment, discoursing with him on divers
occasions.
In company of other Genewayes with him, he brought him to a
new erected house of his, a building of great cost and beauty;
where, after he had shewne him all the variable rarieties, he
beganne thus. Master Guillaume, no doubt but you have heard and
seene many things, and you can instruct me in some queint conceit
or device, to be fairly figured in painting, at the entrance into
the great Hall of my House. Master Guillaume hearing him speake
so simply, returned him this answer: Sir, I cannot advise you in
any thing, so rare or unseene as you talk of: but how to sneeze
68
(after a new manner) upon a full and over-cloyed stomacke, to
avoyde base humours that stupifie the braine, or other matters of
the like quality.
But if you would be taught a good one indeede, and had a
disposition to see it fairely effected, I could instruct you in an
excellent Emblem, wherwith (as yet) you never came acquainted.
Master Herminio hearing him say so, and expecting no such
answer as he had, saide, Good Master Guillaume, tell me what it is,
and on my faith I will have it fairely painted. Whereto Master
Guillaume suddenly replied; Do nothing but this Sir: Paint over the
Portall of your Halles enterance, the lively picture of Liberality, to
bid all your friends better welcome, then hitherto they have beene.
When Master Herminio heard these words, he becam possessed
with such a sudden shame, that his complexion changed from the
former palenesse, and answered thus. Master Guillaume, I will
have your advice so truly figured over my gate, and shee shall give
so good welcome to all my guests, that both you, and all these
Gentlemen shall say, I have both seene her, and am become
reasonably acquainted with her. From that time forward, the
words of Master Guillaume were so effectuall with Signior
Herminio, that he became the most bountifull and best housekeeper,
which lived in his time in Geneway: no man more
honouring and friendly welcoming both strangers and Citizens,
then he continually used to do.
69
THE FIRST DAY, THE NINTH NOVELL
GIVING ALL MEN TO UNDERSTAND, THAT JUSTICE IS
NECESSARY IN A KING ABOVE AL THINGS ELSE
WHATSOEVER The King of Cyprus was wittily reprehended, by
the words of a Gentlewoman of Gascoignie, and became
vertuously altered from his vicious disposition. The last command
of the Queene, remained upon Madam Elissa, or Eliza, who
(without any delaying) thus beganne. Young Ladies, it hath often
beene seene, that much paine hath beene bestowed, and many
reprehensions spent in vaine, till a word happening at adventure,
and perhaps not purposely determined, hath effectually done the
deede: as appeareth by the Tale of Madame Lauretta, and another
of mine owne, where with I intend briefly to acquaint you,
approving that when good words are discreetly observed, they are
of soveraigne power and vertue.
In the dayes of the first King of Cyprus, after the Conquest made in
the holy Land by Godfrey of Bullen, it fortuned that a
Gentlewoman of Gascoignie, travelling in pilgrimage to visit the
sacred Sepulcher in Jerusalem, returning home againe, arrived at
Cyprus, where shee was villanously abused by certaine base
wretches. Complaining thereof, without any comfort or redresse,
shee intended to make her moane to the King of the Country.
Whereupon it was tolde her, that therein shee should but loose her
labour, because hee was so womanish, and fainthearted;
that not onely he refused to punish with justice the offence
of others, but also suffered shamefull injuries done to himselfe.
And therefore, such as were displeased by his negligence, might
easily discharge their spleene against him, and doe him what
dishonour they would.
When the Gentlewoman heard this, despairing of any consolation,
or revenge for her wrongs, shee resolved to checke the Kings
deniall of justice, and comming before him weeping, spake in this
manner. Sir, I presume not into your presence, as hoping to have
redresse by you, for divers dishonourable injuries done unto me;
but, as full satisfaction for them, doe but teach me how you suffer
such vile abuses, as daily are offered to your selfe. To the end, that
being therein instructed by you, I may the more patiently beare
mine owne; which (as God knoweth) I would bestow on you very